A.
'I actually look rather good in jeans. So I rarely wear them. I don't want to get mixed up with the wrong sort of person.' So runs the logic of Isabel, 'our heroine' in this refreshingly zany novel. An art student of 31, devotee of historical romances, she seeks Mr Right but is concerned lest her knobbly knees ruin her chances. Hope, however, springs eternal - which proves to be her salvation, and that of other people in the story. Employing the staccato drama-laden pace of an early silent film, with chapter headings like 'Our Hero Feels Inspired', the author writes with terrific verve.

B.
This is a celebration of the birth and subsequent near-death of a local radio station in America. It is the wry view of a national institution - the wireless - seen through the eyes of a weedy, intelligent child, Francis With. Francis works for WLT (With Lettuce and Tomato) Radio, a station set up by Roy and Ray Soderbjerg to advertise their sandwich bar. Soon the station is beaming out a motley collection of singers, preachers, soap-opera heroes and continuity announcers. This small-town American setting provides the author with huge scope for the dry humour and understated prose for which he is justly praised. He skilfully transports the reader from the present back to the gentler days of the 1940s and 1950s, an era of dime stores, oil-cloth, old-fashioned Ford motor cars and, of course, the wireless.

C.
In the world created by the author, it is quite in order for a second husband to gossip with his wive's first husband. So, when high-flying professor Richard Vaisey falls for a beautiful Russian poetess, he naturally confides in his wive's ex. The poetess writes rotten poetry, which troubles Richards critical conscience; she's also trying to get his support for her wrongfully imprisoned brother. However, none of these complications is half as interesting as the way the author untangles them. He moves the plot along with a robust sense of the ridiculous and dissects relationships with perceptive care. It all makes for a highly enjoyable, sophisticated and witty read.

D.
Two sets of best friends - two women, two men - meet in the London of the sixties, and for the next quarter of a century are bound together in life and death. At the outset of this long novel, one of the four, the mysterious American tycoon, James Hudson, is launching a newspaper, which his friend Richard Blake is editing. The launch is crucial, but so is the fact that the woman they both adored (and that one of them married) was killed some years before... Murder, ambition, love and jealousy - it's all here, and the writing's good as well. This is one of those books, in size and range, where you can really get to know the characters and be engrossed in them.

E.
Written by one of the very best American fiction writers, this amusing and compassionate story tells how Ian Bedloe, by way of atonement for a sin that leaves him plagued with guilt, becomes 'father' to his brother's three orphaned children. What with the detritus of domesticity, he is, at 40, slowly sinking into eccentric bachelorhood. The story covers much emotional ground and highlights, in canicular, the touching, tender relationship Ian develops with the youngest child, Daphne. A lovely, warm book with exactly the right balance of pathos and laughter.

