BRINGING UP BADGERS

'What now?' was my immediate thought, as one of my helpers canned a cardboard box towards me. Since my husband Derek and I turned our dairy farm in Somerset into an 'open farm' six years ago, we've established a reputation for looking after orphaned animals. But the noise coming from die box -- a cross between a cackle and a bark - was not one I recognised, so it was with great interest that I peered in to see three small grey badger cubs, each no more than eight inches long. Their coats (later to reveal fleas) were like velvet, and milky-coloured eyes looked up at me from three tiny black-and-white striped heads.
I had never seen badger cubs before. As most of them are born between mid-January and mid-March, they usually spend their early life underground and, if orphaned, die of starvation, never to be found. These three had been brought in by building contractors; while laying drain pipes,their machinery had bored into the sett before they realised it. The mother was found dead with her babies still suckling her.
I could see they were healthy and well but they were cold and whimpering. After defleaing them, I took them into the farmhouse kitchen and installed them beside the stove for warmth. There were two females, Primrose and Bluebell, and a male, Willow. Initially I used a syringe to feed them but each cub had to be wiped with a warm cloth first to simulate the sensation of the mother licking them. This encouraged them to empty their bowels and bladder. For the first two or three days they were fed every four hours.
Within a week the cubs had progressed to drinking from a bottle and were moving around, albeit shakily. With each other for company and a heated pad as a substitute 'mum', they seemed very contented. Three weeks after their arrival, however, I noticed that Willow seemed lethargic, although he was still taking food as normal. It was a warning sign. I should have reacted straightaway; not realising its importance, I awoke the next morning to find him dead.
The vets post mortem revealed that Willow had died from a lung infection. When bottle feeding any animal it is important not to let it drink too fast, as liquid can overflow into the lungs. In Willows case this had caused an infection that would have been difficult to rectify, even with the help of antibiotics, in one so small.
Disheartened by my failure, I continued rearing the others. But fate works in strange ways: six days later a local farmer, who had heard about our cubs, came to see me. Behind some silage bags he had discovered a single male cub, abandoned by its mother. He knew she would not return; the area had been disturbed too much and already the cub was cold and hungry.
Willow II joined the fold. At six weeks, he was about two weeks younger than the females and over the next few days I discovered why his mother had left him. Never had anything been so difficult to feed. To place the bottles teat in his mouth and cajole him into drinking I had to keep moving it around and squeezing it. After a full 10 minutes he would latch on to it as if he had not drunk all day. By the end of April the females were weaned on to creamed rice and then literally anything. It was to be a different story for Willow. He was happy to give up the bottle but could not master the habit of eating without walking through his food, tipping it over or just sitting in it. Eventually I offered him a sausage, which little by little was chewed, played with and finally eaten. After a week of sausages he was ready to move on to something else.
At nearly five months old, they were all eating cereals for breakfast; a meat and vegetable meal for lunch and fruit and nuts, cheese, hard boiled eggs and sunflower seeds in the evening. The usual diet for badgers is 60 per cent earthworms, plus beetles and bugs, baby rabbits, mice and voles and even shoots or roots of plants. Certainly my badgers were much better off than other cubs that year; the summer was exceptionally hot and digging for earthworms must have been almost impossible.
By August my foundlings had begun to turn nocturnal and would go for walks only at dusk or late at night. We often went through the cider orchard; in its long grass, everyone was fair game. The cubs would get excited, ruffle up their fur so that they looked like snowballs and chase each other's tails. As 'human badgers' we were included in this sport. I learnt to avoid those playful charges that ended with a sharp nip, but Derek accompanied us only occasionally and so never grasped this skill: his reactions to being caught were sometimes as colourful as his bruises.
It was during two of these late-night walks in the very dry period that I spotted odder badgers in our field. Presumably they were having to extend their territories to find enough food, although badgers are very territorial and will kill others that wander into their territory. We were even warned that they would climb into our badger pen and kill the cubs, so sheet metal was placed over the gate to make it as inaccessible as possible.
The local press took some pictures of me walking the badgers, and such was the response that we started an appeal to build a sett on the farm for the badgers to move into. With advice freely given, we designed our badgers' new home. Daniel, one of our sons, drew up the plans and we built a sett complete with tunnels, an enclosure and a badger gate facing the same way as their nightly walks.
It had three chambers, one slightly larger than the others, with a glass side to enable people to see into the sett from a darkened enclosure. As the sett began to take shape, the badgers would explore it before going on their walks. Eventually walks were forgotten in the excitement of climbing through the tunnels and sorting out bedding.
The cost of the building work was far more than we envisaged but a local bus company (the aptly named Badgerline) sponsored part of the appeal, and local firms donated building materials. Everyone, it seemed, wanted to see the badgers with a home of their own.
Early one evening they finally moved in. After watching them for a while, we left them to settle. Half an hour later I crept back to see if all was well, to be met with the sight of three badgers curled up in their chambers sound asleep.
These days my walks with them are not as regular, especially as they are not fully awake until midnight. We see Primrose only occasionally (she has joined a neighbouring sett) but
Bluebell and Willow II still rush up to say hello before they go dashing off into the night. This is their territory now, an area that they have come to know well and a home they have readily accepted.