Talking shop

Ever entered a store and come away with more than you intended to buy? We reveal the selling devices shops use that are designed to make you spend, spend, spend.

A. The image of freshness 

Supermarkets know from their market research that shoppers place a premium on fresh produce being in stores. They may place their fruit and veg at the entrance of a store, or even a display of house plants for sale, to enhance this. They may also provide an in-store bakery that wafts irresistible fresh bread smells around a large area of the store. The colour of the store's fixtures may heighten the image, too - for example, green may be used because of its association with fresh produce. The bulk of what supermarkets sell -
pre-packaged grocery items such as frozen foods and washing powders - may be quite different from this image.

B. Displaying to advantage

The location of products in the store is considered all-important in determining how well a particular brand sells. Nowhere is this more developed than in supermarkets. With computerised stock-control, supermarkets can find out the parts of the store from which shoppers will select items most often. In these areas can be found products with the highest mark-ups or ones which, though less profitable, sell very quickly. 
Traditionally in retailing, 'eye-level means 'buy-level' -- shelves at eye height are eagerly sought by manufacturers, or may be reserved for certain own-brand items. 'Dump bins' containing special offers tempt those who find it hard to resist a bargain.
Increasingly popular is 'complementation' - placing dessert or salad dressings, say, over units containing ice-creams or items that may be eaten with salads such as burgers.

C. Spreading staples around the store

Supermarkets may spread low price staples such as bread, tea and sugar around their stores and a long way from the entrance - shoppers have to pass tempting, higher-profit lines on the way. In similar vein, chainstores may locate the products they have a good reputation for as far away from the store entrance as possible. They can rely on a degree of customer loyalty towards these products, so they gamble that shoppers will go actively looking for them around the store, passing other wares that might tempt them.

D. Less sells more

Chainstores have transformed the presentation of their wares in recent years. Much of the pioneering work has been done by the Next chain, which turned away from the 'pile them high, sell them cheap' approach to popular fashion. Next stores have a 'boutique' appeal - they're noted for displaying limited fashion-wear on the shelves, giving the impression that the merchandise is exclusive. Of course, Next's clothing is not less mass-produced than that of their rivals - the company's success is as much a testament to good store design as it is to well-designed clothing.

E. Tempting totals

Food shoppers, it seems, are more responsive to the overall size of their weekly or fortnightly bill than to the prices of individual items. Supermarkets take advantage of this by stocking a mix of low mark-up staples and high mark-up items, so it shouldn't be assumed everything that a supermarket sells is cheap. Low prices are of direct appeal to the thrifty shopper.
It's often said that supermarkets deliberately lose money on certain staples to draw shoppers in - known as 'loss leaders'. More commonly, their low prices are achieved by buying in huge quantities from manufacturers, by offering them a prominent place to display their products or by exceeding sales targets - all of which attract big discounts from the manufacturers.

F. The all-important price-tag

Shoppers tend to buy fewer items in chainstores and may be more aware of individual pricing as a result. So the importance of pricing, say, a blouse at PS14.99 as opposed to PS15, still holds. (It's also a useful device, apparently, to reduce theft among the shop's own staff, who are obliged to ring up a sale in order to give the penny change.)

G. Lighting to effect

Both supermarkets and chainstores give careful thought to lighting. With chainstores, the aim is to achieve lighting which is as close to natural light as possible so that shoppers get a fair idea of what the colour of the clothes will be like in daylight. With supermarkets, special lighting (and mirrors) may be used to enhance certain foods, particularly fresh fruit and veg.

H. Walk this way

Many chainstores have divided up their floors with different carpeting - one pattern for the routes through a store and one defining sales areas. Shoppers are drawn naturally along these routes known within the trade as the 'Yellow Brick Road'. It's not always successful - some shoppers are reluctant to stray off the routes into the sales areas. Marks and Spencer for example, use wood or marble covering for routes, encouraging shoppers to walk on to the more welcoming carpet in sales areas.

I. In-store promotion

As you enter a supermarket, giant colour photographs of succulent roasts, fancy cakes and cheeses hit you - irresistible if you've had nothing to eat before setting out on your shopping trip. In the United States, 'video trolleys' are being tried out in a number of supermarkets. Each trolley has a screen which advertises products as you shop. Sensors at the end of shelves trigger relevant advertising - so the shopper passing the cook-chill cabinets, say, may receive an ad on the screen for ready-made moussaka. Such trolleys are aimed unashamedly at the impulse shopper, and the makers claim they increase sales by around 30 per cent.