THE DAY I GAVE UP SMOKING

I thought everyone would be pleased, but one of my colleagues was absolutely furious. 'What do you mean?' she raged. 'If it was that easy, why didn't you stop years ago?'
I suppose my inability to explain how one afternoon I had been a packet-a-day, life-long smoker, and four hours later I was not, was faintly irritating. I find it curious myself.
The stop-smoking session was an interesting mixture of group therapy and hypnotherapy and it took place exactly two months and three weeks ago.
I had not intended to stop and I did not even particularly want to. For one thing, I wholly resented the remorseless pressure from the anti-smoking mob - and I still do. For another, I had low blood pressure and a long-living and healthy family. I did not cough or feel unwell and threw off colds more easily, it seemed to me, than friends with consciously healthier lifestyles.
On that unexceptional Thursday afternoon, I had simply gone along to the Birmingham session of The Easy Way to Stop Smoking to write an article about other people trying to give up. 'I shan't be trying to stop myself, it wouldn't be fair,' I announced firmly. 'Since my motivation for being here is writing, not stopping, it would not be right to expect your method to work on me.'
I could not have been more reasonable. After all, I positively enjoyed smoking. It gave me real pleasure. I thought the counsellor looked at me rather knowingly.
We were encouraged to smoke as much as we wished and most of the afternoon was conducted in a room so smoke-filled that we had to open the windows.
I noticed with interest that when I was told to smoke I was reluctant to do so -- and so were the others.
I suppose what happened was that the stop-smoking messages made intellectual sense. Just as smoking itself had become a challenge in the face of opposition, so the notion of stopping began to feel attractive.
The possibility of not being a smoker was beginning to make me feel powerful. It was a secret feeling that had nothing to do with anyone except myself. Could I also conquer the world?
In many senses, it was easy. The physical craving, the pangs of desire for nicotine, in just the same place where you feel hunger, faded after a minute or two and I experienced them over only four or five days.
The one activity - my work - that I thought would be the most difficult to accomplish without cigarettes did not cause a single problem. I had really believed that I would not be able to work to deadlines unassisted by nicotine and that for the first time ever I would fail to write a story to order.
Surprisingly, pottering around at home on weekend mornings proved to be the most difficult thing - and it still is.
I am increasingly coming to the view dat for me smoking had a great deal to do with displacing boredom; having a cigarette was an activity in itself.
Yes, I do miss my cigarettes, but not too much. Each 'new' experience as a non-smoker has to be addressed - eating out, waiting for an aeroplane, booking into a hotel, a theatre interval. All are key moments in which I would have previously smoked cigarettes.