Tapping into a food supply

In the forests of Madagascar there lives a primate with a lifestyle remarkably like a woodpecker's. Both the woodpecker and the primate, the rare and elusive aye-aye, bore through wood and probe cavities beneath the surface in their search for insect larvae. The woodpecker, of course, uses its beak for chiselling into the wood and its long tongue to extract its prey; the aye-aye, on the other hand, uses its incisor teeth to gnaw its way in and its narrow, elongated third finger to probe and scoop. Though the aye-aye's strange way of feeding was first described over a hundred years ago, scientists have only now discovered how it locates the insects hidden inside the wood.
Dr Carl Erickson, of Duke University's Primate Center, has been investigating the hunting skills of two captive males, Nosferatu and Poe, a female, Samantha, and her infant daughter, Annabelle (Animal Behaviour, vol. 41 pp. 793-802). He first tested whether they found insects just by looking for the telltale visual signs of their presence. For example, holes on the surface might indicate sites where female insects had entered the wood and laid their eggs. Dr Erickson presented the aye-ayes with logs in which he had drilled several narrow holes. Some holes led to cavities containing mealworms while others were blank dead-ends. The aye-ayes went straight for the cavities with food, gnawing through the wood and clearly not requiring the visual clues of surface holes.
Perhaps the aye-ayes were locating the mealworms by their smell or the sounds they were making. But further tests showed that they didn't use these clues either. Logs in which the smell of the insects was prevented from leaking out presented no problem, and the aye-ayes also located dead (and therefore silent) mealworms.
If they weren't seeing, smelling or hearing the insects, how were the aye-ayes able to find them? Dr Erickson discovered that they would gnaw down to empty cavities as well as those containing mealworms. They could apparently sense the cavity itself.
When searching for food, an aye-aye taps the surface of the wood with its middle finger and brings its exceptionally large ears forward, focusing them at a point in front of its nose. Dr Erickson suggests that the animal is echo-locating, listening and perhaps feeling for reverberations of the taps that indicate a hollow space below. It can probably also hear the rustle of insects, which might move when disturbed by the tapping from above.
The theory that the aye-aye takes the place of woodpeckers in the woodpecker-free forests of Madagascar is an attractive one. But there are birds, such as the Sickle-billed and Nuthatch Vangas, which do probe for or glean insects from wood, and so the woodpecker niche may not be vacant. Not only can the aye-aye be regarded as a woodpecker and an echo-locating bat rolled into one, but it also behaves like a squirrel (indeed, it was originally classified as one). Its incisors grow continuously like a squirrel's, and it has recently been observed in the wild gnawing through the shells of nuts, and extracting the meat of the nut with its elongated finger.