THEATRE

CHARLES SPENCER

A. Tamburlaine the Great

Marlowe's ten-act epic about the all-conquering warrior can seem never-ending, but it emerges as one of the most thrilling nights of the year in Terry Hands' staging. He has hacked great chunks from the text and offers a production that combines the glories of Marlowe's play with an exhilarating speed and physicality. Antony Sher is in terrific form in the title role, somersaulting from the balcony, sliding down a rope head-first as he delivers a speech, demanding and getting the audience's complete attention as his eyes glint with a mad lust for power and glory. Great stuff.
Swan Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon (01789 295623)

B. Women Laughing

Welcome London transfer for the late Michael Wall's fine play, seen at the Manchester Royal Exchange in May. The first act creates an atmosphere of unsettling menace as two married couples chat on a sunny suburban lawn. In the second half the location shifts and the piece becomes a powerful, compassionate study of the devastating effects of illness. The British theatre lost a talent of great promise when Wall died at the tragically early age of 44.
Royal Court Theatre, London SW1 (0207 730 1745)

C. Amphibians

Billy Roche is the latest in the long line of Irish dramatists to have enriched the English stage. All his plays to date have been set in his native Wexford, and this latest piece explores the decline of the fishing industry with his usual mixture of rich characterisation, painful emotion and sudden moments of quirky humour. The play sprawls a bit aimlessly at times, but builds to a blistering climax.
Barbican 3 Pit Theatre, London EC2 (0207 638 8891)

D. Murder by Misadventure

Traditional thriller involving our old friend, 'the perfect murder'. This time it is Gerald Harper and William Gaunt who play the crime-writing partnership intent on killing each other, and though its all rather familiar stuff; the twists and turns are handled with ingenuity.
Whitehall Theatre, London SW1 (0207 867 1119)

E. The Alchemist

Young director Sam Mendes finds the gold in Jonson's great comedy of 17th-century confidence tricksters. First seen at the Swan in Stratford last year, the show works just as well on the Barbican's main stage, with Jonathan Hyde, David Bradley and Joanne Pearce repeating their fine performances as the wicked trio of con-artists.
Barbican Theatre, London EC2 (0207 638 8891)

F. The Madras House

Peter James' production of Harley Granville Barkers rich, panoramic comedy about fashion and the position of women in Edwardian society transfers to London after its success at the Edinburgh Festival. The staging is stylish, the acting excellent, the play itself an unjustly neglected classic.
Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, London W6 (0208 741 2311)

G. Dreams from a summer house

This delightful new musical finds playwright Alan Ayckbourn in unusually benign form as he relocates the Beauty and the Beast story deep in the heart of London suburbia. A lush score by John Pattison and an unashamedly schmaltzy celebration of romantic love combine to make this good-hearted show a real winner. London impresarios looking for a hit should board the next train to Scarborough.
Stephen Joseph Theatre, Scarborough (01 723 370541)

H. The Merry Wives of Windsor

David Thacker's lacklustre production of Shakespeare's most farcical comedy came perilously close to being awarded the dreaded thumbs-down symbol, but this disappointing, crudely designed show is redeemed by first-rate comic performances from Ron Cook as the French physician Dr Caius and Anton Lesser as the explosively jealous husband, Ford. Almost everyone else looks faintly embarrassed, as well they might.
Shakespeare Theatre, Stragford-upon-Avon (01789 295623)

I. The Voysey Inheritance

Another major Granville Barker revival, now touring the regions. This story of an apparently respectable solicitor who bequeaths a corrupt financial legacy to his son results in a marvellous play.
Apollo Theatre, Oxford (01865 244544)