Ordinary people, ordinary lives

Most of us have photographs of our grandparents, but how many of us know what their lives were like, the sort of people they were in their youth? The glimpses rare diaries give us are frustratingly incomplete, family anecdotes only half remembered. And what will our grandchildren know about us? We often intend to write things down, but never get round to it. We may leave videos rather than photographs, but the images will remain two-dimensional.
Hannah Renier has come up with an answer: she writes other people's autobiographies, producing a hardback book of at least 20,000 words -- with illustrations if required - a chronicle not of the famous, but of the ordinary.
The idea came to her when she talked to members of her family and realised how much of the past that was part of her own life was disappearing. 
"When I started I didn't take it nearly so seriously as I do now, having met people who genuinely will talk and have led interesting lives," she says. "They would say they are doing it for their children or for posterity, but they are getting quite a lot out of it themselves. They enjoy doing it."
The assurance of confidentiality encourages her subjects to overcome any instinct of self-censorship. 
"I had the confidence to be honest," says a 62-year-old man who made and lost one fortune before making another. "I was surprised at what came out. There were things that hurt, like my divorce, and the pain was still there."
"I did it for my family, so that perhaps they could learn something, but I have not yet let my children - who are in their thirties - read it. They were hurt by things in my life and there are a lot of details which I don't feel I want them to know at the moment. If they insist, I'll let them. But I think I'd rather they read it after I was dead."
He also recognised patterns laid down in childhood, which showed themselves in repeatedly making the same mistakes. It is something Ms Renier has detected in other people. "It's amazing how many people really have been conditioned by their parents," she says. "The injunctions and encouragements that were laid down in childhood have effects for the rest of their lives. They become caught in repeating patterns of behaviour. They marry the sort of people of whom their parents approved -- or go in the opposite direction as a sort of rebellion."
"A lot of disappointments come out. Sixty years later they still are regretting or resenting things that were never resolved with their parents. There is no age of reason. If people had hang-ups in their youth, they still have them in middle age. They live their lives in an attempt to impress a parent who wasn't impressed and if that fails some of them seem to be seeking permission to say 'I can't stand my mother'."
Recorder rather than inquisitor, Ms Renier keeps her distance. "It's not for public consumption and I'm not there as a very nosy person. People have got carried away and told me something, then said, 'I'm not sure if that ought to go in'. I put it in anyway - they can remove things when they see the draft. But generally people want to be honest, warts and all."
"It's not vanity publishing, it's not people saying 'Gosh, I've had such an interesting life the world's got to know about it.' Things are moving much faster than at any time in history and we are losing sight of what happened in the past. It's a way of giving roots. We need some sort of link to our ancestors because people don't sit around in an extended family any more. People want a little immortality."
Each book involves up to 30 hours of taped interviews which Ms Renier uses as the basis to write the life story, rearranging the chronology and interpreting. Modern technology allows her to produce everything except the binding with its gold lettering: choose your own colour of library buckram, pick your own title.
Fascinating to the private audience at which each book is aimed, the results are obviously not of the dirt-at-any-cost school of life story. Ms Renier organises her material logically and writes well, the final content is as good as its subject. The hook that emerges does not look like a cheap product - and carries a price tag of nearly PS3,000, with extra copies at PS25 each. She receives about 10 inquiries a week, but the cost - inevitable with the time involved -- clearly deters many people.
"I thought it would be a more downmarket product than it is," she says. "But the people I've done have all been county types, readers of Harpers & Queen, which is one of the magazines where I advertise. They're the sort of people who at one time would have had their portraits painted to leave to their descendants."