WEATHERVANE MAKER

THE MAKING of weathervanes is an ancient skill, going back to early Egyptian times. Today the craft is still very much alive in the workshop that Graham Smith has set up. He is one of the few people in the country who make hand-cut weathervanes. Graham's designs are individually created and tailored to the specific requirements of his customers. 'That way I can produce a unique personalised item,' he explains. 'A lot of my customers are women buying presents for their husbands. They want a distinctive gift that represents the man's business or leisure interests.'
It's all a far cry from the traditional cockerel, the most common design for weathervanes.
It was not a cockerel but a witch on a broomstick that featured on the first weathervane Graham ever made. Friends admired his surprise present for his wife and began asking him to make vanes for them. 'I realised that when it came to subjects that could be made into them, the possibilities were limitless,' he says.
Graham decided to concentrate his efforts on a weathervane business. He had sewed an apprenticeship as a precision engineer and had worked in that trade for 15 years when he and his wife, Liz, agreed to swap roles - she went out to work as an architectural assistant and he stayed at home to look after the children and build up the business.
That was five years ago and he has no regrets about his new direction. 'My previous work didn't have an artistic element to it, whereas this is exciting and creative,' he says. 'I really enjoy the design side.'
Graham has now perfected over 100 original designs. He works to very fine detail, always seeking approval for the design of the silhouette from the customer before proceeding with the hand-cutting.
Graham also keeps plenty of traditional designs in stock, since they prove as popular as the one-offs. 'It seems that people are attracted to hand-crafting,' Graham says. 'They welcome the opportunity to acquire something a little bit different.'
Graham has no plans for expansion, as he wants to keep the business as a rural craft.
'I have found my place in the market. People love the individuality and I get a lot of satisfaction from seeing a nondescript shape turn into something almost lifelike,' he says.
'For centuries, weathervanes have kept communities in touch with the elements signalling those shifts in wind direction that bring about changes in the weather,' he explains.
'And nowadays, with more and more people moving to the country, individuals want to put an exclusive finishing touch to their properties. It has been a boost to crafts like mine.'
Graham has become increasingly busy, supplying flat-packed weathervanes to clients worldwide.
American and Danish buyers in particular are showing interest. 'Pricing,' he explains, 'depends on the intricacy of the design.' His most recent request was for a curly-coated dog. Whatever the occasion, Graham can create a gift with a difference.