Hide and Seek

Yvonne Coppard

Emma and her friends are pursuing a holiday game -- surveillance of a suspicious bookshop -- when she realises that one of its rare customers is her
Uncle Jim.
He callously draws her into a web of deceit and crime, manipulating her affection for him and attempting to alienate her from her friends, whose characters are persuasively drawn by Coppard.
When Emma finds her life in danger, things take a dark and compelling turn - her confinement in the cellar of a derelict house is stunningly handled.
This book reveals the minutiae of family life, the bonds of childhood friendship and warns that adults aren't always the protectors they ought to be. A vital and convincing read.

Backtrack

Peter Hunt

Two teenagers, 'peasant' Jack and Rill, a boarder at a posh girls school, join forces on realising that relatives of both were involved in an apparently inexplicable 1915 train accident, in which eight people died. Varied viewpoints and documents -- maps, first-hand accounts, hurt records, railway histories -- throw an ever-changing light on the incident, so that the reader works as hard as the two protagonists to understand what happened and why. A clever, complex novel which rewards close attention.

Pigeon Summer

Ann Turnbull

Mary Dyer doesn't really fit into her family or male-dominated culture; for one thing, she, a girl, loves her father's racing pigeons and when he must go away to find work, Mary knows enough to carry on managing the loft and winning prizes, despite increasing conflict with her harassed mother. Set believably in 1930, this readable tale has a sound basic message that 'There are different kinds of cleverness', which can't be bad. Thoughtful readers should find satisfaction here.

Yaxley's Cat

Robert Westall

Unusually, Robert Westall uses the viewpoint of a mature woman for this chilling story of rural prejudice and persecution. Rose, to escape from her materialistic life and her smug husband, rents Sepp Yaxley's cottage with her two children. A ferocious cat, and bizarre items found in cupboards, reveal the answer to why Yaxley disappeared, but the newcomers' presence arouses local hostility to the point where their own lives are at risk. By the end, the threatening violence is controlled, but Rose feels just as dismayed by the methodical ruthlessness of her teenage son. Utterly gripping.

Someone's Mother is Missing

Harry Mazer

At the poor, shambling, noisy end of the family there's Sam - fat, overtalkative and awed by his supercool and sophisticated cousin,
Lisa, from the apparently rich end of the clan. When Lisa's privileged world crumbles, it's Sam who helps her to find some balance, out of which both gain a better sense of reality and the value of family.
The pace is slightly slow in parts but there's a gentle humour and the developing closeness of the two teenagers is convincingly handled. It could be interesting to both boys and girls, which is a bit of a rarity.

Stanley's Aquarium

Barry Faville

Barry Faville writes with assurance and humour, vividly evoking his New Zealand setting and creating an intelligent and likeable first-person narrator. Robbie takes a jon gardening for elderly Stanley, finding him at first fascinating and later repellent; when she finds out what he keeps in his aquarium and what he plans to do with them, the book takes 'thrillerish' twist without losing its sharp insight into character and relationships. Unusual and compelling.

Dodger

Libby Gleeson

A painful, sad story where the troubled personal relationships plus the stormy school life of Mick are told though a skilful blend of flashback, a teacher's letters to a friend, the boys own notes and sympathetic narrative. Coming to terms with the negative expectations of others and his own poor sense of self-worth is achieved through a role in a school play and by an impressively sensitive first-year teacher.
Highly recommended, even though it's truly an agonising read, especially at the end.