NATURAL TALENTS

In the mere seven million years since we humans separated from chimpanzees, we haven't had time to develop any differences: genetically we're still more than 98 per cent identical to chimps.
On this grand evolutionary scale, whatever it is that separates humans from animals is a very recent development. Our biological history implies that our physical capacity for making art (whatever changes were needed in the human physique, brain, and sense organs) and anything else we consider uniquely human must be due to just a tiny fraction of our genes.
That's a large burden to place on a relative handful of genes. It should come as no surprise, then, that modern studies of animal behaviour have been shrinking the list of attributes once considered uniquely human, so that most differences between us and animals now appear to be only matters of degree.
For example, tools are used not only by humans but also by wild chimpanzees (which use sticks as eating utensils and weapons), and sea otters (which crack open clams with rocks). As for language, monkeys have a simple one, with separate warning sounds for 'leopard', 'eagle' and 'snake'. These discoveries leave us with few absolute differences, other than art, between ourselves and animals. But if human art sprang from a unique genetic endowment, isn't it strange that our ancestors dispensed with it for at least the first 6.9 million of the 7 million years since they diverged from chimps?
The earliest art forms may well have been wood carvings or body painting. But if they were, we wouldn't know it, because those materials don't get preserved. Not until the Cro-Magnons, beginning around 35,000 years ago, do we have unequivocal evidence for a distinctly human art, in the form of the famous cave paintings, statues, necklaces and musical instruments.
If we're going to insist that our recent creative burst finally does set us apart, then in what ways do we claim that our art differs from the superficially similar works of animals? Three supposed distinctions are often put forward: human art is non-utilitarian, it's made for aesthetic pleasure and it's transmitted by learning rather than by genes. Let's scrutinise these claims.
First, as Oscar Wilde said, "All art is quite useless". The implicit meaning a biologist sees behind this quip is that human an doesn't help us survive or pass on our genes -- the evident functions of most animal behaviours. Of course, much human an is utilitarian in the sense that the artist communicates something to fellow humans, but transmitting one's thoughts or feelings isn't the same as passing on one's genes. In contrast, birdsong serves the obvious functions of defending a territory or wooing a mate, and thereby transmitting genes. By this criterion human art does seem different.
The second claim -- that only human art not is motivated by aesthetic pleasure -- also seems plausible. While we can't ask robins whether they enjoy the form or beauty of their songs, it's suspicious that they sing mainly during the breeding season. Hence they're probably not singing just for aesthetic pleasure. Again, by this criterion human art seems unique.
As for human art's third distinction -- that it's a learned rather than an instinctive activity -- each human group does have distinctive art styles that surely are learned. For example, it's easy to distinguish typical songs being sung today in Tokyo and in Paris. But those stylistic differences aren't wired into the singers genes. The French and Japanese often visit each other's cities and can learn each other's songs. In contrast, some species of birds inherit the ability to produce the particular song of their species. Each of those birds would sing the right song even if it had never heard the tune. It's as if a French baby adopted by Japanese parents, flown in infancy to Tokyo and educated there, began to sing the French national anthem spontaneously.
The role of learning in human art is also clear in how quickly our an styles change. Roman authors described geese honking 2,000 years ago, as geese still do today. But humans innovate so rapidly that even a casual museum-goer would recognise almost any twentieth century painting as having been made later than, say, the Mona Lisa. Connoisseurs can do better, of course. When shown a work with which they are not familiar, they can often identify not only when it was painted but who painted it.
Yet even connoisseurs would mistake the identity of two mid-twentieth century artists named Congo and Betsy. If judged only by their works, they would probably be identified as lesser-known abstract expressionists. In fact the painters were chimpanzees. Congo did up to 33 paintings and drawings in one day, apparently for his own satisfaction, and threw a tantrum when his pencil was taken away.
Congo and Betsy were honoured by a two-chimp show of their paintings in 1957 at London's Institute of Contemporary Art. What's more, most of the paintings available at that show sold; plenty of human artists can't make that boast.
These paintings by our closest relatives, then, do start to blur some distinctions between human art and animal activities. Like human paintings, the ape paintings served no narrow utilitarian functions; they were produced not for material regard but only for the painter's satisfaction. You might object that human art is still different because most human artists intend their art as a means of communication. The apes, on the other hand, were so indifferent to communicating with other apes that they just discarded their paintings. But that objection doesn't strike me as fatal, since even some human art that later became famous was created by artists for their private satisfaction.