Young Masters

Age is against Bobby Fischer as he seeks again to re-establish himself. Chess is more than ever a young man's game.

After 20 years of self-imposed exile, Mr Bobby Fischer has returned to chess and is playing his old adversary Boris Spassky. Mr Fischer's victory in the first game was a masterpiece, simple but profound. But, as subsequent games have shown, this balding, bearded chess player is not the man of 1972. He is 49 years old, out of practice and out of shape. Mr Spassky is even older.
Chess has also changed a lot over the past two decades. A new era of professionalism was born out of Mr Fischer's own popularisation of the game. The rise of the professional chess circuit has seen the competitive aspect of the game overtake the scientific and artistic. The sole aim of the modern master is to win.
In international chess, a player's nerves and stamina are as crucial as his intellect and wisdom. The pressure of the game has always been intense: a chess clock is used to ensure that each player completes the stipulated number of moves in the allotted time - failure to do so results in immediate loss of the game. But now the playing sessions themselves are becoming longer, and many games are played without a break. The increased pressure has swung the pendulum in youth's favour. Over the past 30 years, each new world champion has been younger than his predecessor. It is significant that, of the world's ten highest-ranked players, eight are under 30.
Nor is it only the way the game is played that has changed. Much of modern chess is played off the board - and not just the battle for psychological advantage that Mr Fischer wages so well. Every professional must now take seriously his pre-match preparation, not least because the age of computer databases has had a profound impact on chess. A small portable computer can hold one million chess games, and give instant access to hundreds of games of a prospective opponent.
In one recent contest, each of the protagonists employed large teams of assistants to work round the clock searching for flaws in the other's repertoire. The opening stages of a chess game are now analysed to near exhaustion. Simply being better prepared in chess opening can be the deciding factor in the game.
The chess world today boasts more first-rate players than at any stage in its history. Hundreds of grandmasters chase modest prize money the world over. Success demands physical as well as mental exertion. A single game may last up to eight hours. For the chess master this period represents a ceaseless struggle. A lapse in concentration can mean disaster. So the adversaries are always in a state of nervous tension.
The presence of the chess clock adds to the tension. The climax of the game is often a furious 'time scramble'. When this occurs, each player has only seconds to make several moves or face instant forfeiture. With minds racing and hands twitching, the masters blitz out their moves and press their clocks with a co-ordination that any athlete would admire. Such moments are not for reflective intellectuals. The game descends into a primeval struggle in which nerves, tenacity and an overwhelming will to win separate victor from vanquished.
At the top level of chess, the pain of losing is unbearable. Winning brings immense satisfaction and a chance to recover from the nerves and exhaustion. But one victory is not enough to win a tournament. The chess master must be ready for the struggle the next day. Most chess competitions last for 9-11 days, with play on every day, and there is an all-year-round tournament circuit. World championship matches are even more exacting. The 1984 encounter between Anatoli Karpov and Gary Kasparov in Moscow had to be aborted after several months on the grounds of mutual exhaustion. Mr Karpov had shed around two stone (10kg) in weight.
Can Mr Fischer defy these odds? He once declared "All I want to do, ever, is play chess."
This sentiment made his exodus from the chess world after 1972 seem even more inexplicable. But in some respects it was a fitting end to his story. It immortalised Bobby Fischer.
If he has come back for the money, he is onto a good thing. Whatever happens in his match with Mr Spassky, each will end up several million dollars richer. But if Mr Fischer has returned in the sincere belief that he can show he is still the best player in the world, the final result could be heartbreaking.