A. The University Museum of Classical Archaeology

The Museum of Classical Archaeology is one of the few surviving collections of casts of Greek and Roman sculpture in the world, comprising over six hundred works. The first thing to remember about the collection is that nothing here is genuine. All the sculptures are accurate replicas cast from the originals, mostly in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Museum is housed in a purpose-built gallery with excellent natural light. The advantages of plaster casts are many: groups of sculptures originally set up together but now split between various museums all over Europe can be viewed together as originally intended. Nearly all the most celebrated works of Greek and Roman sculpture can be viewed in one afternoon.

B. Cambridge Darkroom

Cambridge Darkroom is a centre for photography with community darkrooms and a gallery showing a varied exhibition of photography and related media. We regularly run courses and workshops for people of all ages and abilities, including our popular Beginner's Course, a shorter Induction Course and Master Classes with invited photographers. We have a membership scheme whereby all our members can use our darkrooms. We also encourage young photographers (aged 12 to 16) to develop their skills with our Young Members scheme, led by our resident photographer. We stock photographic books and an magazines and carry a full range of photographic materials.

C. Sedgwick Museum of Geology

The Sedgwick Museum houses a magnificent collection of fossil animals and plants, rocks and minerals of all geological ages, and from all parts of the world. It also houses Britain's oldest intact geological collection, that of Dr John Woodward (1665-1728). It includes nearly 10,000 rare and interesting specimens stored in their original early 18th century cabinets. Adam Sedgwick was Professor of Geology and keeper of the Woodwardian collection. Throughout his long life, he added enormously to the collections, laying the foundations of a truly outstanding museum. The collection is arranged by geological age so that the major changes in life on Earth can be traced through time.
The new Whewell Gallery houses the beautiful minerals and gems of the collection. The displays are accompanied by full explanatory labels to explain both their nature and modern use.

D. The Cambridge University Collection of Air Photographs

There are over 400,000 oblique and vertical air photographs in the collection, taken by members of the university's staff over the past 45 years. The University has its own aircraft based at Cambridge Airport and undertakes photographic work throughout Great Britain. The photographs are of considerable general interest as a detailed, year-by-year record of the landscape, showing both the natural environment and the effects of human activity from prehistoric times to the present day. There is a small display in the entrance hall and the knowledgeable library staff will be happy to deal with canicular enquiries. The photographs cannot be borrowed but copies can normally be purchased. These are made to order and ordinarily take about a month.

E. Cambridge Medieval Brass Rubbing Centre

Cambridge Brass Rubbing Centre, the second oldest and longest surviving centre in the world, is one of the regions most unusual tourist attractions. Hours of enjoyment are to be had creating wall hangings by rubbing one of over a hundred different brass plates off tombs of medieval knights and ladies. By formulating resin copies, known as facsimiles, the centre has made it possible to preserve the originals and still make brass rubbing an accessible pastime to all. The brass plates, as an alternative means of memorial to the tomb statue, spread from Germany across medieval Europe and Scandinavia. Through various revolutions most of the beautiful brasses were destroyed. The vast majority of remaining brasses are to be found in Britain and the widest range of examples can be seen at the Cambridge Centre.