Great sports

Women on a winning streak

To excel in any sport is hard enough, even far men, but women have to be twice as tough. Training and competition leave little time for a normal life, so sacrifices must be made. But against all the odds they are beating prejudice and breaking records. Here, we talk to just a haw brilliant British sportswomen who are achieving their goals.

A. Jill, 27, skier

"It's a great feeling to fly through the air and land cleanly, but it can be scary. Sometimes you don't feel well or it's windy and you can't see, but you just get on with it. It's not easy to have a career outside skiing because we train for ten months of the year. You give up a lot of your social life and friends. But it was my choice. There are six men and three women in the British team. We all compete on the same courses at the same competitions and get treated the same - it's a young sport."

B. Caroline, 22, cyclist

"Two years ago I borrowed a bike to take part in a charity race. I won overall just because I cycled faster than everyone else, which was amazing because I'd never cycled before! I'm well paid as a pro, and cycling has lots of potential in terms of endorsements. However, I know I'm not ugly and it worries me that people may think I've got where I am because of how I look, not because I'm the best cyclist. So I tend to concentrate on the cycling at the moment, rather than earning money I do at least four hours' training every day on the bike, plus some stretching exercises, swimming and running.
My boyfriend's a cyclist as well, so he knows the time you have to put into it -- it would be impossible otherwise."

C. Annabel, 26, rower

"Rowing is hard for girls to get into because very few girls' schools do it. So most don't start till they're 19 or 20 which makes it harder to succeed at an international level. Also, you usually have coaches who only stay a year or so. There's no continuity so the women's squad is basically a shambles. But it's great fun and I love being fit, plus there's a good social life."

D. Ffyona, 24, long distance walker

"At 13 I dreamed of walking around the world -- I didn't know just how big it was then! But Britain was too claustrophobic, too safe. I was very headstrong; I hated anyone having control over me. Now I am more tactful. Each walk has been different.
The walk across Australia was the worst experience I've ever had as far as pain is concerned. I was doing 50 miles and 21 hours each day with three hours sleep in high temperatures and walking with 15 blisters on each foot. But I got the record! I had to, because my sponsorship money was going to run out after 95 days. Men think that women are more likely to fail, so sponsoring them is always seen as a higher risk."

E. Lisa, 26, saloon car racer

"Some men have huge egos when they're driving - you see it on motorways. When I'm doing well, they don't talk to me. Being a woman has its disadvantages.
When I get to a corner, the men think 'I've got to beat her', so I've had a lot of knocks!
You have to be naturally competitive and aggressive. It's very difficult to earn any money and what I do make goes back into the sport. Women have been racing since the twenties and have always been classed as eccentrics. It's great that there are now more and more women taking up racing every year. For me, the appeal of saloon car racing is aiming for perfection always trying to get round with a perfect lap."

F. Alison, 28, triathlete

"I get up at 5.30 three mornings a week to swim. I need Tuesday and Thursday mornings to catch up on my sleep. In the evening I just cycle or run. Yes, I do fall asleep at my desk sometimes! There is a lot of nervous build-up beforehand and when you're racing you really push yourself - you don't feel good if you don't. Several times I've asked myself why I do it. The answer is a) I'm happier when I keep fit, b) I'm a slob at heart and if I didn't make myself do this I'd really be one, c) racing is very social.
Men and women usually compete together but when an event is given coverage in the press, 90 per cent of the article will explain the men's event and 10 per cent will say, 'Oh, by the way, so-and-so won the women's event'. The prize money isn't as good either, of course. But now we've formed an International Triathlon Women's Commission, so we're working on it."