Sea, Ice & Rock

Mountaineer Chris Bonnington (58) is best known for scaling the summit of Everest in 1985. He has also pioneered routes in Britain and the Alps and written many books, including Quest for Adventure and Everest the Hard Way. Robin Knox-Johnston (53) began his sea career in the Merchant Navy.
In 1968-9 he was the first to circumnavigate the world single-handed, in his yacht Sunhaili. He broke the transatlantic record, taking 10 days to reach the Lizard from New York. The two teamed up to sail and climb in Greenland, recording the trip in their new book: Sea, Ice and Rock.

In 1979 I was working on Quest for Adventure, a study of post-war adventure. I called Robin to ask for an interview and he said would I like to join him for a sail. I could show him some climbing techniques and he could show me the rudiments of sailing.
It was the first time I'd been on a yacht. We sailed for a while and then anchored. Robin's wife and daughter stayed on the boat and we paddled to the shore to exercise Robin's skills at climbing.
The route was quite difficult and I was impressed at how steady Robin was in tricky conditions. He just padded quietly along. After a bit we I arrived at this huge drop. I asked Robin if he had ever climbed before. He hadn't, so I showed him. When I had finished, Robin very politely asked if he could go down the way he climbed down ropes on his boat.
He was used to using his arms, I wanted him to use his legs. I wasn't too happy about it, but he lowered himself down quite safely. It was during that trip to Skye that Robin and I built the foundation of a very real friendship.
His proposal that we should combine our skills on a joint trip to Greenland was just an extension, on a rather grand scale, of our voyage to Skye. Robin impressed me immensely as a leader. Traditionally, the skipper makes all the decisions.
But Robin made a point of consulting everyone first. Most of the time, nobody dared to advise him, but it was nice to feel you were part of the decision-making process.
To be frank, I found the sailing trying and very boring. The moments of crisis which we had on the way back were easy to deal with: the adrenaline pumps and you get all worked up. The bit I found difficult was spending day after day in the middle of the sea.
I am a land-lover and not really a do-it-yourself type of person. Robin, in contrast, is a natural sailor and seemed to enjoy tinkering with the engine or mending the lavatory. I was aware that Robin didn't really need me.
To be honest, I felt a bit useless at times; I found that very trying. The crew was also packed very close together: six people on a 32ft yacht, designed to sleep four. At least when you're on a mountain expedition you have a chance to get away from each other.
When we reached Greenland and it was my turn to 'lead' the expedition, I found it difficult taking responsibility for Robin's life. There were many instances climbing together when if Robin had fallen, he could have pulled me off with him. I had to watch for that constantly. I underestimated how difficult the Cathedral -- Greenland's highest mountain - would be.
Robin isn't a natural climber, which made his efforts even more impressive. The first time we tried to reach the pinnacle, we were on the go for 24 hours. On the way down we were dropping asleep on 50 degree slopes, 1,500 feet above the ground. Robin went to hell and back, but he totally put his confidence in me.
He just followed. When it got too difficult and I realised wed have to turn back, he accepted it. I also knew that Robin was worried about the boat: whether we'd be able to get it through the ice, whether it was in one piece.
Yet he was all in favour of us having another go at climbing the mountain. The only time there was a near-crisis in our relationship was on the yacht on the way home. We were taking it in turns to be on watch. I was supposed to get up at 4 am for my shift, but Robin decided not to wake me. He felt he could do it himself.
The previous night I'd almost dropped asleep. I felt that he didn't trust me - I felt insecure, and I said so. Robin immediately reassured me that I'd jumped to the wrong conclusion.
While we enjoyed the Skye trip, we didn't really know each other until the end of the Greenland expedition. I found that underneath his bluff exterior, Robin was a kind-beaned, sensitive person.