Ancient Chinese medicine in the West?

Acupuncture is two thousand years old. It comes from the traditional Chinese system of medicine that includes herbalism, massage, diet, manipulation and exercise. It is used to treat many different conditions, but acupuncture's role in treating pain has received most attention by doctors in the West. Some GPs, midwives and physios use it regularly for pain relief.

A. What's it all about? 

Traditional Chinese medicine sees health as a state in which the energy of the mind, body and spirit are in harmony. According to the theory, energy or Qi (pronounced chee) flows around the body along lines called meridians. There are twelve main meridians, each linked to an internal organ, and lots of tiny meridians take Qi to every cell. When the flow of Oi is upset, blocked or weakened, the body is said to be out of balance: weakness or illness may result. During a consultation with a traditional acupuncturist, he or she will try to find where imbalances occur in the Qi. This is done by feeling pulses on your wrist, examining your tongue and assessing your general appearance. He or she will ask about your medical history, current health, general well-being, state of mind, and your eating and sleeping habits. An acupuncturist uses fine needles inserted into the skin. He or she may also apply warmth from smouldering herbs or pressure at points on meridians, to stimulate the flow of Qi.

B. Over three hundred points
 
The points used for acupuncture are related to meridians so won't necessarily be near the site of the complaint. People often say they feel a not unpleasant dull ache or tingling sensation when the needle is gently manipulated. This is either done by hand or by attaching the needle to an electro-acupuncture machine. Acupuncturists say this sensation shows the needle has reached the Qi in a meridian.
There are over three hundred points on the main meridians, with hundreds more elsewhere that are used less often.

C. Science tells us how

Without accepting the principles of traditional Chinese medicine, doctors here have accepted that acupuncture can work for pain relief. This is because they have been able to provide scientific explanations of how it might work. For example: 
* It has been suggested that stimulating particular nerves blocks pain signals and stops them from reaching the brain.
* Some scientists believe that stimulating acupuncture points releases natural pain-relieving substances (endorphins).

D. What type of pain can be treated?

Many people with chronic long-term pain turn to acupuncture as a last resort. Back pain, spots injuries, arthritis, headaches and migraine and post-operative pain are commonly treated with acupuncture.
Other types of pain which acupuncturists claim to treat include menstrual pain, facial nerve pain and pain suffered by terminally ill people.

E. Modern use for an ancient treatment

Although acupuncture has been used in China for over 2,000 years, one development has been rather more recent. The use of acupuncture instead of anaesthesia during surgery only started in the 1950s. It was this that helped to convince some doctors outside China that there was more to acupuncture than mind over matter.
In China today, acupuncture is used during all sorts of operations, from tonsillectomies to caesareans, and is even used in open heart surgery. Needles may be used alone, with electrical stimulation or with drugs. It's claimed that the pain is more or less eliminated, but it varies from person to person. It's hard to imagine many of us finding the option of lying awake on the operating table very attractive. But acupuncturists say that acupuncture anaesthesia involves none of the side-effects of conventional anaesthetics (e.g. nausea), and you recover from it more quickly.

F. Always effective

As with most complementary therapies, clinical trials to evaluate acupuncture are difficult to run. But trials that have been done have shown that 50 to 80 per cent of people find acupuncture effective for chronic pain. Acupuncturists generally quote a similar success rate. They accept that it won't work for everyone and that people vary in their responsiveness.
Traditional acupuncturists say that for chronic long-term pain it will usually take between six and seven visits for people to feel real relief. But some improvement should be felt after just two or three visits.

G. A different approach to pain

But Western and Chinese medicine view pain rather differently. Like most alternative therapists, an acupuncturist views his or her patient in a holistic way. This means not just focusing on specific symptoms. An acupuncturist spends a long time making a diagnosis, trying to find underlying weaknesses in the Oi. He or she will also want to know what external factors are causing the pain. For instance, is the pain worse in the cold, heat, damp or wind? Does it feel sharp, dull, throbbing, constant or burning? These are seen as important factors in deciding how acupuncture can be used to treat the pain. It's unlikely that your average medical doctor would take such things into account, isn't it?

H. Traditional or not?

Some medical professionals do have traditional acupuncture training. Others - including many GPs who practise acupuncture reject traditional Chinese theory and subscribe to scientific explanations.
But many traditional acupuncturists believe that only by applying traditional Chinese medicine is it possible to bring about deep changes that lead to a longer cure - something that is very difficult to assess in trials.
Care should always be taken in choosing an acupuncturist, who should refer you to a medical doctor for funner investigation if necessary.