BOOK A

Steve Martin's Compelling Evidence is compelling indeed. The narrator, a lawyer struggling to build a new practice after being forced to leave a high-
powered law firm, finds himself manoeuvred into defending his boss's wife when she is tried for her husbands murder. The trial scenes are riveting, with the outcome in doubt right up to the verdict, and a really unexpected twist in the final pages. This is a terrific debut into a crowded genre.

BOOK B

Curtains for the Cardinal begins with a bang, and plunges the charismatic Sigismondo, troubleshooter for the aristocracy of the Italian Renaissance, into a turmoil of politics, clerical intrigue and high-wodety murder from which we are always confident he will emerge unscathed to disclose the guilty parties. The plot is convoluted and the book is about 50 pages overweight, but it is still great stuff.

BOOK C

File Under: Deceased introduces a refreshingly different new detective from a first novelist, Sarah Lacey. Leah Hunter is a tax inspector, ideally positioned, it seems, for a bit of investigating when a strange man falls dead at her feet. Undaunted by attacks from various quarters - perhaps tax inspectors are used to this sort of thing - and the disapproval of her handsome local detective sergeant, gutsy, versatile Leah is a winner in every way.

BOOK D

Double Deuce by Robert B. Parker sets that most literate of private investigators, Spenser, the job of assisting his friend Hawk to clear drug dealers out of a deprived estate in rundown Boston. The slick dialogue comes almost as fast as the bullets, but there are few corpses and more philosophy than usual. High-quality entertainment, as always from Parker.

BOOK E

False Prophet by Faye Kellermann, features her usual pair of detectives, Pete Decker and Marge Dunn, investigating an attack and burglary at the house of a legendary film star's daughter. The author's easy writing style and eye for odd human behaviour make this an entertaining mystery.

BOOK F

Husband and wife, Diane Henry and Nicholas Horrock, write as a team. Blood Red, Snow White features another lawyer, another female client, but the action is all outside the courtroom and the defender finds himself becoming the victim as the plot unravels. All the classic ingredients of romance, money and violence are mixed efficiently to produce an engrossing suspense novel.

BOOK G

Dead for a Ducat by Simon Shaw presents actor Philip Fletcher in a new role, that of intended victim. The hilarious collection of characters are brought together to film the story of Robin Hood, but Philip isn't the only person to feel this is not the way his career should be developing. Simon Shaw never fails to entertain, but in moving his star actor from black comedy to farce, he gives a performance below his usual high standard.

BOOK H

Fall Down Easy is Lawrence Gough's best book for some time. Canadian police hunt a versatile bank robber who preys on female bank tellers. The slow, expertly-paced build-up of tension and the portrayal of the clever, disturbed robber raise this way above the average detective novel.