With the trees, I planted my stake in New Zealand

JONATHON PORRITT

TALKS TO DANNY DANZIGER

Jonallum Porritt is the author of Seeing Green - The Politics ofEcology'.
I HAD a most peculiar period of my life when I didn't have any summers. I went out to New Zealand every summer here, which is the New Zealand winter, and so I had nine winters on the trot, which was great, because I like winter.
My parents came up with this idea of buying a small plot of land which 'the kids', my brother, sister and I, could look after. Mother said, 'If you can take the time and trouble to plant it with trees then you can have it.' The idea was that we would always have a stake in New Zealand, which is a lovely idea as my father was actually brought up there. And they found a plot of land about 20 miles north of Auckland in a place called Rangitoupuni. It's rather poor land, really, but it's quite good for planting trees on.
I've always been very keen and enthusiastic about land. I'd spent a year in Australia working on sheep stations and helping out in different farming jobs, and so the idea of planting trees sounded like a very nice idea, and I was immediately keen. I think the rest of the family got enthusiastic as we went along. I started planting in 1968, and by the end of 1972 between the three of us we'd planted the whole 70 acres.
In New Zealand in 1968 it was one of those winters. It rained an awful lot, endlessly in fact, and in a way it's idiotic to think back on it as such an immensely happy time as it rained pretty well most days that we were planting, and I don't suppose I've ever been wetter or colder for such a prolonged period.
There was a moment of truth every morning: getting ready for the next planting session. Coming out of the Land Rover relatively warm and dry, with the rain coming down, and your anorak still clammy from the day before, boots still sodden, hands fumbling with slippery laces.
'The brain begins to take over and to allow for all sorts of strange thoughts, ideas and reflections about life.'
In that first year I had a guy to work with me who was an experienced tree-planter, which was very helpful as I'd never planted trees seriously before all this. You have a planting bag around your neck which you fill with as many trees as you possibly can, and when your bag is full it's a nightmare, and it's only as it gets lighter that life gets easier.
In a way, the most difficult bit of the entire operation was getting the lines straight. You work out what spacing you're going to plant the trees at, and then you line up a series of three poles across as long a trajectory as you can get, and those poles then determine your lines. Once you're in line, you just plant all the way down the line till you get to the end, turn around and come back again. I enjoy hard physical work, and it certainly made me fit.
After a certain point you can plant trees almost on automatic, you become used to a rhythm, and you use the minimum number of spade strokes that you need to get the hole in the ground. The rhythm is something that everybody tells you about and, of course, it's true of many agricultural jobs that you actually have to train the body into a series of quite standardised moves, and then it becomes immensely easy: so you develop an absolutely regular process of taking the tree out of the bag, digging a hole, putting it in the ground, stamping it in, and moving on. Mentally, it's very interesting. The brain begins to take over and to allow for all sorts of strange thoughts and ideas and reflections about life - a lot of my thinking about the natural world and our place in it, all of those things that have since dominated my life, first began to pop through my head in those days.
I've been back to New Zealand four times since then and watched the trees gradually grow, which has been very satisfying when you actually planted the things and you do then have a kind of stake in what happens and how they prosper.
I always dread reading in the newspapers stories of another high wind in New Zealand, or Worst Drought Ever Hits New Zealand. Such headlines make me feel extremely apprehensive. However, it worked out extremely well and those trees are now 20 years old, and in good fettle.
The only postscript I should add is that I took a term off from teaching, and I went back there in 1984, completely on my own for three months. And I wrote my first book there, Seeing Green. There's a little cabin on the tree farm which is fantastically basic, just a bed, a table and a chair. In the mornings I would do my writing; in the afternoons I would go off and prune the trees, and then do research in the evenings.
The connection between me and that area is still immensely strong. In many respects it's the place that I feel most closely identified with in terms of that link between people and the earth: it's a most powerful bond.