The long-distance runner

Richard Nerurkar, one of Britain's top 10,000-metre runners, visits the Kenyans' high-altitude training camp.

Ten miles south of the equator, a sony mountain track leads off the quiet metalled road from Nairobi. The track marks the start of the trek up Kenya's highest peak, the glacier-capped Mount Kenya. This gorgeous, if lonely and isolated, spot is Nanyuk: for the past three years it has been my base for mid-winter altitude training in Kenya's Central Highlands.
But not once on those trips had I trained with Kenyan runners on their home soil. On my fourth and most recent winter training trip to Kenya, however, I broke a personal tradition. I both competed in my first-ever race in Kenya's oxygen-thin air and stayed at Kenya's national team training camp, which is where the country's top runners prepare for their annual assault on the World Cross-Country Team Championships.
I was invited by Kenya's national team coach when I finished fifth - behind three Kenyans and a Moroccan - in the World Championship 1O,000 meters race. It was an opponunity not to be missed. Training at high altitude produces more red blood cells, which improves oxygen-carrying capacity.
These benefits have been borne out by the successes of generations of Kenyan runners.
My first African race - which came before my spell at the Kenyan team training camp - was also a first for the whole continent. Held in Nairobi, it was the first-ever international cross-country race to be held on African soil.
If nothing else, it was a humbling experience. Of the 41 runners who finished ahead of me, all but 3 were Kenyan. And I honestly felt I hadn't had a bad race!
However, I don't believe Kenyan success can entirely be put down to the altitude factor. Kenyan runners are also noted for their refreshingly uncomplicated approach to the sport. While their running style is seemingly effortless, their diet simple and their manner of conversation relaxed, they also seem to love competing.
But the least discussed aspect of the puzzle of Kenyan success was perhaps the most basic: how do they train? My stay with the Kenyan runners at their team training camp soon provided the answers.
The national team training camp is at St Mark's College, 6,200 feet up the southern slope of Mt Kenya, surrounded by beautiful playing fields and dense tropical vegetation.
It's a fairly basic affair, though: there are few comforts. The athletes live among the college's regular students and are housed six to a room in cinder-block dormitories.
The athletes' days at the camp are dominated by three work-outs: a leisurely early-morning run, interval training at mid-morning, followed by a steady run in the late afternoon. The daily regime began at six. We crawled from our bunks and assembled to be briefed by the coaches for the morning run.
"Run easy, you have a hard job today", we were warned as we left by the coach who'd invited me.
The total distance covered each day was about 40 kilometres - a little short of a marathon distance. The only exception was Sunday, with just the one scheduled run of 20 kilometres, which certainly came as a welcome respite from the rest of the week's three daily work-outs.
Running apart, life was complication-free. A splash of water on the face and a brush of the teeth sufficed for pre-breakfast preparations. Breakfast itself consisted of tea, bread and boiled eggs, taken in a sparsely-lit, small dining area.
Lunch and dinner both had a similar menu: ugali (a maize dish), stew, cabbage or spinach and tea. When the day's running was over, in the early evening, we would pile into a car and drive down to bathe properly in one of the many streams that run off from Mt Kenya's shrinking glaciers.
By the time I left the camp, I was even more appreciative of Kenyan success. That success just can't be attributed to genetics or upbringing or altitude alone.
I couldn't stop myself pondering upon a rather different explanation: that the purity and simplicity of the mountainside lifestyle, these gruelling work-outs and this passion for success, perhaps these are the secrets, perhaps these are the real reasons behind Kenya's rise to the top of world distance running.