Photographing People

People are the most interesting of all subjects. A photograph with someone in it is almost always more compelling than the same shot without the human interest. People are also the most difficult subjects to photograph well. Apart from the technical and artistic considerations, the photographer has to be conscious of actions, gestures and expressions. And often the presence of the camera itself can have a disastrous effect on these.

A. GROUPING PEOPLE

Avoid straight lines in group shots. Ask people to stand at different angles and distances and if possible on different levels. Otherwise, have some of the group sitting or kneeling at the front so that you can see all the faces, or raise your own viewpoint.

B. POSING FOR PICTURES

People seldom act naturally in front of the camera. Often they stiffen up and the pose becomes rather wooden. Relax your subject by helping him to find a comfortable position. You might suggest he folds his hands or puts them in his pockets.

C. THE RIGHT APPROACH

Never try to pretend that you are not taking a picture of someone when it is clear that you are as this only creates tension and even hostility. Most people will agree to have their picture taken - perhaps after some initial protestations - and are quite flattered by it. But they are likely to become rather self-conscious and you may need to direct them. A picture can be spoiled by the fact that the subject is looking rather aimlessly out of the picture so that the interest lies elsewhere.

D. EYE CONTACT

A picture gains immediate impact if the subject appears to be looking at the viewer of the picture. Ask your subject to look into the lens - not necessarily to smile as well -- and this is the effect you will get. The subject may not be able to do this for too long: he may become self-conscious or be distracted by someone nearby. So remind him once more, just before you release the shutter. Or try saying something funny or unexpected as you take the shot for a genuine reaction rather than a meaningless stare.

E. CANDID CONCENTRATION

An alternative to direct eye contact is for the subject to concentrate on something within the picture area. Your subject might find this easier to do, and the viewer can follow the attention to another part of the picture. You get the impression that you are observing the subject unnoticed. Candid shots have a special fascination and the subject's expression is vital to the picture.

F. EXPRESSIONS AND GESTURES

Expressions and the gestures that go with them tell us more about the subject of a photograph than anything else. Even if he is obviously badly treated and hungry, a laughing child provokes a smile from the viewer, whereas a sad expression produces a sympathetic sadness in the viewer, however apparently comfortable the subject may be. Look for familiar expressions for your portraits: shrugs, winks, anger, tears, thumbs-up, fist-clenching and so on. They are an instant visual language.

G. SITUATION INTEREST

Though shots which isolate a figure or face prominently have great impact, the subject's background or environment can add extra interest and information about the subject. When using a background in this way, try to exclude details that are not relevant to the subject or blur them by focusing selectively. Make sure that the subject is not overwhelmed by the background - a wide-angle lens will make your subject appear relatively larger by comparison with the background.

H. INTERACTION

Wherever two or more people are talking, arguing, haggling, joking or working together, there are opportunities for good pictures. Couples make appealing shots; so do mothers and babies, teachers and children or teams of people working or playing a sport. Look out especially for contact between the subjects - either eye-contact or physical contact, like a protective hand on the arm or a handshake. Or show how one is reacting to another by waiting for an animated expression or telling gesture.

I. PEOPLE AND PLACES

Many pictures of people are taken on holiday or during an outing - partly to show the place they were visiting. A little care will greatly improve this type of picture. To show people against a relevant background, use a standard or a wide-angle lens and move far enough back to get the whole building (or mountain, or lake) in the frame. Ask your subjects to come fairly close to the camera and compose the picture so that the group forms a foreground interest without obscuring the background. If you can find a slightly elevated camera position, this will be far easier to do. A good picture will show a balance between the subjects and the place they were visiting, so that both claim an equal share of the viewer's attention.

J. TO POSE OR NOT TO POSE?

In answer to this question, first decide why you want to take the picture. If you are taking a picture to remember someone by someone you may have met briefly on holiday, for example - then you will want a good clear picture and it would be worth asking the subject to pose against a well-chosen background. Pictures of the family, on the other hand, can be very tedious if they are a succession of formal poses in front of places of interest. Candid pictures of events as they happen are far more lively, and you are more likely to get unselfconscious shots when you know the subject well. A picture taken on the spur of the moment will jog the family memory in future years far better than a posed portrait.