New In Paperback

A.
The career of citizen Tristan Smith, set in the fictional republic of Efica, is an extraordinary parable of human power, history and humour. In a feat of considerable literary skill, the author has created a world with its own history, traditions and customs.
The book is notable also for its humour, and for the author's unique vision, which is here combined with his penetrating psychological insight in a novel which is difficult but rewarding.

B. 
Harriet is poised and middle-class, with an architect husband and her own business. 
Ordinarily, she would never have met Sheila, a traditional working-class woman who looks after her ageing father and has brought up her grandson, Leo, since he was three.
Their lives are shattered when the teenage Leo viciously attacks Harriets son, Joe, in the street. After the court case both boys refuse to talk about what happened. Leo, who had been a model pupil and had never been involved in a fight before, will not explain what came over him, while Joe recovers physically but becomes withdrawn. Harriet is tortured by the effect on her son and ministering to him takes over her life. Sheila is so wracked with guilt that she requests a meeting - from which their unusual friendship grows.
The great strength of the author has always been in depicting how people react to upheaval in their lives. He also captures the mothers sense that, no matter how hard she tries, she can never do enough.

C.
Shortlisted for the Booker prize, this book follows the fortunes of one of the most isolated of the Scottish Orkney islands and its inhabitants over a long and uneventful rural history.
The book sets this narrative against pertinent moments in Scottish history, as vividly imagined in the daydreams of the young protagonist, Throfinn
Ragnarson, who disappears abruptly at one point in the book, only to return after the Second World War, having now learnt to appreciate the simplicity of his worthy ancestors lives.

D.
Following his recent blockbuster success, the author has produced a sequel resonant with the same gentle irony and acid observations of family life which made its predecessor so appealing.
Fifteen years after her daughter's death, Aurora Greenway approaches her seventies with her spirited companion, Rosie Sunlap. Aurora's approach to life remains the same winning combination of vanity, charm and reluctant kindness, and Rosie provides an ally in her continuing and highly enjoyable manipulation of both suitors and friends. By the end of the book, Aurora is forced to acknowledge the passage of time that brings a new generation to centre stage.
The author is skilful at exposing the haunting sadness that hovers beneath the seeming ordinariness of life. He is attuned more to the shadows than the bright lights of human activity and identifies the randomness of events.

E.
Six disparate people are brought together by millionaire Logan Urquhart to sail around the islands of the South Pacific in his yacht, the Ardent Spirit. With her awe-inspiring mastery of descriptive language, the author charts the personal voyages of self-discovery with which each of these mariners prepares to return home, their own spirits quickened and made ardent by the experience of life adrift on 'the desert cities of waves'.
The author uses startling images to convey her themes of memory and awareness. Those images are both alienating and illuminating.