The day I drew Picasso

Richard Cork recalls how, as an 78-year-old student, he came face-to-face with one of the most revered artists of the century.

Even seen at a distance, eating his lunch at an open-air restaurant in Cannes harbour, Picasso was instantly recognisable. I was an I8-year-old student, filling in time before university by travelling round Europe and Morocco in a battered and unreliable van. Having run out of money, I found a boat-painting job on the waterfront. But I spent much of the time drawing, and was lucky enough to be carrying an ample sketchbook when my encounter with the octogenarian artist took place.
Picasso was known to be a fairly reclusive figure who spent most of his time shut away working high in the hills. So I was doubly astonished to find him seated at a table with his wife, Jacqueline, and three companions. Without my friend's prompting, I would never have dared to walk over and ask for his signature. Nor did I imagine, as I nervously introduced myself and offered my sketchbook, that he would comply.
But my request was generously granted. Taking the large sheet I passed over, Picasso inscribed his name across the top of the paper. Then, as if unable to resist the blankness below, he added an exuberant linear flourish on the rest of the page. But Pcasso's art, even at its least representational, was usually anchored in observed reality. So the curves may well refer to a cloud, the wind-rippled sea or the shape assumed by Cannes harbour, dominating his lunchtime vantage point.
Delighted, I thanked him and embarked on a halting conversation. Since Picasso's English was even poorer than my French, an extravagantly dressed American woman at the table acted as our interpreter. She kept describing him as the Maestro, and it was difficult to combat her gushing interjections. But I did manage to tell Picasso of my voracious interest in art and my admiration for his work.
After a while, I resumed to the boat and proudly displayed the fruit of my visit. But the friend who had encouraged me to introduce myself to Picasso could see that the lunch party was still in progress. 'Is that all?' he asked, looking at the signature. 'Why on earth don't you go back and make the most of it? You won't get a chance like this again - and he probably wouldn't mind if you drew his portrait.'
Sketchbook under arm, I returned to Picasso's table. I thought it wise not to ask him whether he'd mind having his portrait drawn: a refusal at this stage might have wrecked the whole delicate enterprise. So I simply stood by the table, propped my pad against an ironwork screen, got out a stick of crayon and stayed to draw.
Once he noticed, Picasso grinned like an imp and made my task wickedly difficult. He acted out a range of expressions, both ridiculous and macabre - rolling his eyes, sticking out his tongue and brandishing his hand in fantastical shapes on either side of his forehead. The entire performance was carried out with the gusto of an instinctive clown.
I was tempted to give up the struggle, but the sheer high spirits of my playful sitter seemed tantamount to a challenge. However obstructive his antics, I felt that he was testing my persistence, in order, perhaps, to discover the true extent of my determination.
As if to bear this out, Picasso at last relented and lapsed into repose. For a few extraordinary minutes, he deliberately gave me the chance to study him without impediment. I noticed how tough and alert he appeared, still taut in a blue-and-white striped jersey. As compact as a wrestler, the deeply tanned figure resembled an athletic 60-year-old rather than a man who would soon be celebrating his 84th birthday.
I marvelled at the youthfulness of his clear, dark eyes, set with startling intensity in features remarkably unencumbered by the folds of slack flesh on so many elderly faces. The eyes were mesmerising, and I tried to give them the necessary forcefulness. After fastening themselves on whatever they wanted to scrutinise, they did not blink until the unwavering gaze moved elsewhere.
He also seemed curiously removed and alone, even though there was plenty of company nearby. His engaging burst of buffoonery could not disguise an underlying gravity of spirit. Content to let his friends do most of the talking, he sat in a very private and absorbed silence, pursuing his own isolated interests undisturbed.
When the American lady told me that the Maestro wanted to see his portrait, I became embarrassed and replied that it wasn't good enough to show him. Picasso insisted, however, and after I passed my sketchbook over, he gave my efforts a generous nod.
Then, to my astonishment, he announced that it was now his turn. I lost no time in giving him my crayon, and his hand applied a few swift, decisive strokes to the paper. In a matter of seconds, with beguiling assurance, he outlined a bearded face below the head which had taken me so many anxious minutes to produce.
He handed the pad back, and there was a drawing blithely at odds with my dogged strivings. Picasso had moved one eye onto my nose, and summarised my smile in a single, irresistibly vivacious line. I looked like a creature who had strayed from one of his more lighthearted mythological compositions. Perhaps he saw me as an intruder from another world, peering in at him with all the gauche curiosity of a young man amazed to find himself face-to-face with an artist he venerated.
I thanked Picasso, and asked him if he would be kind enough to sign the drawing. After consultation, the American explained that the Maestro says you already have his signature. So there were limits to the generosity he was prepared to bestow on me!
All the same, I look back now and wonder at my good fortune. Meeting Picasso and, more important, receiving his attention meant an enormous amount to me.