We changed lives for a day!

Have you ever dreamed about swapping lives with someone else for a day? Perhaps you think it would be more fun to do something quite different for a change? We fixed it for four people - read how it went.
Amanda (23), a young mother with two daughters, swapped lives with her friend Cindy (30), who works as a waitress at a glitzy London restaurant and entertainment complex.

A. Amanda's story

I'd never been inside anywhere remotely like it before. I couldn't believe how dark and noisy it was - there were so many people and such a brilliant atmosphere. It was all a far cry from my home town and, to he honest, I wasn't sure I'd survive! Being a mother is definitely a busy job - but this was something else!
I had just fifteen minutes to learn how to carry a tray of drinks at shoulder height with one hand. The other waitresses made it look so simple, but just as I was getting the hang of it, the drinks started to slide off the tray and crashed on to the floor, splattering cocktails everywhere. I was so embarrassed, but all the other waitresses laughed. Everyone makes a fool of themselves at first!
By opening time at 11.30 am, a queue had already formed outside and I began to feel really nervous. I was worried about how I'd remember all the orders, but that, at least, wasn't a problem because everything was automated.
After a couple of hours my feet really ached and I couldn't get used to the constant loud music. Every time a customer spoke to me I had to say 'Pardon?', which was so embarrassing! By the end of my shift at 5 pm, I was totally exhausted and longed to soak my feet in a bowl of hot water. I couldn't believe it when one of the waitresses told me it had been a 'quiet' day!
I never realised how tiring waitressing would be. I've always thought it was a job for shrinking violets, but in fact you definitely need to be quite bubbly, as well having the ability to keep a cool head and deal with what is known in the trade as a 'high-volume experience' - in other words, lots of customers!
I'm really quite shy and I don't think I could cope on a Saturday night, when it gets chaotically busy. I wasn't too impressed with the pay either. Unfortunately, I must have been a lousy waitress because even the rich Americans didn't tip me a bean!
I must admit I was very glad to get back to my children. It seems quite easy after waitressing!

B. Cindy's story

I was feeling quite apprehensive about being a 'mum' for the day, but I was looking forward to it, too. I'd been warned the girls were cheeky, but in my ignorance I thought I could handle it. Little did I know!
As Amanda left to make her way to the restaurant, I had to get the two girls dressed and fed. After dropping off Sophie at school and Katie at nursery I thought I'd have three hours of peace. Wrong! A note from Amanda reminded me that I still had to make the beds, clean the house and do the washing.
At 1 pm I picked up Katie, whizzed around the supermarket and then took her home for lunch. But it was when I brought Sophie home from school that the real trouble started. They turned the settee into a trampoline and played a game which involved screaming as loudly as they possibly could! I decided to take the laid-back approach, imagining they'd soon get worn out. Wrong again. I thought I had a fair amount of stamina, but they beat me, hands down!
After much persuasion, I managed to get them into bed by about 8 pm, but then the fun and games started! How many glasses of water can a child drink, for heaven's sake? Of course, I realised it was just a ploy so they could come downstairs and watch television, but it was exhausting to spend all evening negotiating deals with them.
I never realised how tiring it could be looking after two small children. You don't get a second to think about yourself - and the sheer sense of responsibility is overwhelming. Even so, I really enjoyed the day.

Rosemary (42) runs a dairy farm. She swapped with Hilary (30), a teacher at a primary school.

C. Rosemary's story

On the farm, I have to get up at 5.30 am so sleeping in until 7 was pure luxury! But I dithered for ages about how to look. I could hardly turn up in overalls and boots, could I?
Looking at a sea of faces -- about 400 pupils -- at assembly, I hoped I melted into the background and that my fresh complexion didn't make me stand out as being straight off the farm.
After that it was time for a maths class. The children worked in small groups, using workcards graded according to difficulty - rather different from when I was at school and we had to recite tables in unison! Then I helped out with a nature project - identifying and feeding species of snails.
By lunchtime I was exhausted and looking forward to an hour's break, but the teachers only have about five minutes to eat their meal. There's so much to do before classes start again. I attended a staff meeting about reports and couldn't avoid getting roped in to help with athletics trials.
Alter lunch there was a silent reading lesson (bliss!) and then a French lesson in the video room. This was great fun because all the children wanted to practise on me, which really showed up my rusty French.
Finally we moved on to the school hall for Physical Education. I was drained by now, but the children seemed to have inexhaustible energy.
The hardest part of the job was standing up in front of the class and speaking - even for just two minutes, it's daunting. Teachers may get more holidays a year, but I think I'll stick to farming, anyway!

D. Hilary's story

I arrived at White House Farm at 8.30 am, bright and early, only to discover that Rosemary had been up for three hours! Rosemary's 280-acre farm has 100 Jersey cows, 15 calves and heifers and about 800 ewes! As well as milk, she manufactures ice-cream, yoghurt and cream, which is sold in shops, restaurants and at tourist attractions. I spent most of the morning in the ice-cream parlour, bottling milk into plastic litre containers, squeezing ice-cream from a machine into cartons and sticking on labels. It was difficult to stop myself dipping my fingers into the goodies! At lunchtime it was time to inspect the sheep. I drove over to one of the fields and picked up a ewe which had fallen over. If the sheep are left for more than 12 hours once they have fallen over they could die, so they have to he checked every day. What a nightmare it must be in winter!
Alter feeding the calves, I started the milking. The process took an exhausting two-and-a-half hours. And Rosemary does this twice a day, starting at 6 am, seven days a week, 365 days a year!
I found it quite a lonely day. I was surprised how much I missed the children - animals don't answer back! The worst aspect of the job is not being able to get away from work. The cows always have to be milked twice a day, so it's really difficult to plan any time off. Rosemary will only get about three days' holiday this year.
Farming seems romantic but the reality is very different. The income is irregular and I'd hate to be at the mercy of the weather.