DO REVIEWS SELL BOOKS?

We asked five leading British publishers about the effect of the reviews of a book on its commercial success. Here is what they said.

Publisher A

Reviews are absolutely key for publishers - the first part of the newspaper we turn to. The Book Marketing Council found some years ago that when questioned on why they had bought a particular hook, more people cited reviews than any other prompting influence (advertisements, word of mouth, bookshop display, etc.).
Authors' responses to reviews are slightly different from publishers. Both are devastated by no reviews, but publishers are usually more equable about the had reviews, judging that column inches are what matter and that a combination of denunciation and ecstatic praise can actually create sales as readers decide to judge for themselves.
Publishers probably get the most pleasure from a review which precisely echoes their own response to a book - they are often the first 'reader'.

Publisher B

While publishers and the press fairly obviously have a common interest in the nature of book review pages, one also needs to remember that their requirements substantially differ: a newspaper or magazine needs to provide its readers with appropriately entertaining material; a publishing house wants to see books, preferably its own, reviewed, preferably favourably.
Without any question, book reviewing is 'better' -- more diverse, less elitist -- than 40 years ago, when I began reading review pages. That said, there is still a long-grumbled-about tendency to neglect the book medium read by a majority -- namely paperbacks. The weekly roundups aren't really adequate even if conscientiously done. And even original paperbacks only rarely receive serious coverage.
But publishers shouldn't complain too much. Like readers and writers, they need reviews, which after all are an economical way of getting a book and an author known. There is no question that a lively account of a new book by a trusted name can generate sales even more if there are several of them. Fame is what puts a book into the hands of readers.

Publisher C

Reviews are the oxygen of literary publishing; without them, we would be cut off from an essential life-source. Because the books we publish are generally not by 'brand-name' authors, whose books sell with or without reviews, and because we seldom advertise, we depend on the space given to our books by literary editors.
When the reviews are favourable, of course, they are worth infinitely more than any advertisement. The reader knows that the good review is not influenced by the publisher's marketing budget: it is the voice of reason, and there is no doubt that it helps to sell books. Publishers themselves often claim that they look for size rather than content in reviews.
The actual effect of reviews on sales is the inscrutable heart of the whole business. Good reviews can launch a book and a career and occasionally lift sales into the stratosphere: but never entirely on their own. There has to be some fusion with other elements -- a word-of-mouth network of recommendation, a robust response from the book trade, clever marketing.

Publisher D

The relationship in Britain between publishing and reviewing? I wish I knew! In the United States it's simple: the New York Times can make or break a book with a single review. Here, though, the people in the bookshops often don't appear to take much notice of them.
It sometimes takes 20 years of consistently outstanding reviews for people to start reading a good writer's work. Yet some of the most dismally received books, or books not yet reviewed, are the biggest sellers of all. So it's all very unpredictable, though non-action is less so.
Mind you, non-fiction does allow reviewers to indulge themselves by telling us what they know about the subject of the book under review rather than about the book itself.

Publisher E

Of course, all publishers and all writers dream of long, uniformly laudatory reviews. But do they sell books? I once published a biography. The reviews were everything I could have craved. The book was a flop -- because everyone thought that, by reading the lengthy reviews, they need not buy the book.
Does the name of the reviewer make a difference? Thirty years ago, if certain reviewers praised a book, the public seemed to take note and obey their recommendations. These days, it is as much the choice of an unexpected reviewer, or the sheer power or wit or originality of the review, which urges the prospective buyer into the bookshop.