Chewing gum culture

It's fashionable, classless and Americans chew 12 million sticks of it a day. Discover how an ancient custom became big business.

Chewing gum contains fewer than ten calories per stick, but it is classified as a food and must therefore conform to the standards of the American Food and Drug Administration.
Today's gum is largely synthetic, with added pine resins and softeners which help to hold the flavour and improve the texture.
This was not always the case, though. The ancient Greeks chewed a gum-like resin obtained from the bark of the mastic tree, a shrub found mainly in Greece and Turkey. Grecian women, especially, favoured mastic gum to clean their teeth and sweeten their breath.
American colonists followed the example of the Amero-Indians of New England and chewed the resin that formed on spruce trees when the bark was cut. Lumps of spruce for chewing were sold in the eastern United States in the early 1800s making it the first commercial chewing gum in the country.
Modern chewing gum has its origins in the late 1860s with the discovery of chicle, a milky substance obtained from the sapodilla tree of the Central American rainforest.
Gum made from this resulted in a smoother, more satisfying and more elastic chew, and soon a whole industry was born based on this product.
Yet repeated attempts to cultivate sapodilla commercially have failed. As the chewing gum market has grown, synthetic alternatives have had to be developed.
Today the few remaining chicle gatherers, chicleros, eke out a meagre and dangerous living, trekking for miles to tap scattered sapodilla in near-100% humidity. Conditions are appalling: highly poisonous snakes lurk ready to pounce and insects abound.
Most alarming is the unpleasant little chicle fly that likes to lodge its eggs in the tappers ears and nose.
Braving these hazards, barefooted and with only a rope and an axe, an experienced chiclero will shin a mature tree in minutes to cut a path in the bark for the white sap to flow down to a bag below.
Each chiclero must carry the liquid on his back to a forest camp, where it is boiled until sticky and made into bricks. Life at the camp is no picnic either, with a monotonous and often deficient maize-based diet washed down by a local alcohol distilled from sugar cane.
Yet, punishing though this working environment is, the remaining chicleros fear for their livelihood.
Not so long ago, the United States alone imported 7,000 tonnes of chicle a year from Central America. Last year just 200 tonnes were tapped in the whole of Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. As chewing gum sales have soared, so the manufacturers have turned to synthetics to reduce costs and meet demands.
Meanwhile, the world's gum producers are finding ingenious ways of marketing their products. In addition to all the claims made for gum - it helps you relax, peps you up and eases tension (soldiers during both world wars were regularly supplied with gum) - gums greatest claim is that it reduces tooth decay.
Plaque acid, which forms when we eat, causes this. Our saliva, which neutralises the acid and supplies minerals such as calcium, phosphate and fluoride, is the body's natural defence. Gum manufacturers say 20 minutes of chewing can increase your salivary flow.
Research continues on new textures and flavours. Glycerine and other vegetable oil products are now used to blend the gum base. Most new flavours are artificial - but some flavours still need natural assistance.
In addition, one hundred and thirty-seven square kilometres of America is devoted entirely to producing the mint that is used in the two most popular chewing gums in the world.