Explore Worldwide - small groups leave few footprints

Explore Worldwide is right in the forefront of adventure travel with trips designed for people who want to get more out of their holiday than just a beach. Our emphasis is on travel to new and unusual destinations, coupled with interesting and original itineraries. Our brochure contains over 100 original adventures - tours, treks, safaris and expeditions - in more than 60 countries around the world. Most trips last from 1-4 weeks.

Small Groups

Averaging 16 people. Small informal groups, expertly led. Giving you a real opportunity to discover more about the places we visit for yourself. More personal involvement brings you closer to the local scene and the local peoples. A stimulating experience for all travellers.

Different Modes of Travel

Many different kinds of transport are used. Often on the same trip. We travel by chartered coach or local bus, by train, expedition vehicle, minibus, boat, canoe, raft, camel, light plane etc. And often on foot. Each trip takes on the character of the local terrain.

Who Travels with Explore?

Interesting people with the resilience to tackle new situations and get the most out of an original adventure. Mainly from the UK, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the States. All our trips are designed to be within the capabilities of almost anyone who enjoys good health, is reasonably fit, and above all adaptable. The majority are aged between 25 and 55. About half are couples. The rest are enterprising individuals travelling alone.

Activities and Interests

It's not easy to describe Explore Worldwide. Each trip is completely unique. So we have divided our worldwide adventures into 8 different categories, describing some of the main activities and interests. Each category represents a special highlight that is an integral part of a particular tour, and of course trips have several different highlights. However, please bear in mind that many other factors contribute to the success of all our trips as a whole. Unique places, unusual encounters, strange customs, unpredictable events, personal involvement - all play their part in the full enjoyment of your holiday.

Cultural/Adventure

Almost all the trips in our brochure have a strong cultural feeling. But a certain number of tours have this as their primary emphasis, focusing closely on local cultures, ethnic peoples and classic sites. For example, anyone looking for destinations of outstanding cultural and historical interest should consider our trips in Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Yemen, Turkey, Greece, India, Bhutan, Thailand, China, Peru, Bolivia, Guatemala and Belize - to mention a few of the places featured in our programme! Short day walks of 2-4 hours to visit unusual or off-the-tourist-track sites are often an integral part of our trips.

Wildlife and Natural History

Our wildlife safaris visit many of the world's greatest game parks and offer a thrilling encounter with animals in their natural state. Choose from dozens of remarkable destinations. In Africa, for example, you often have the freedom to step outside your safari vehicle and tackle the wild terrain for yourself. You could track the rare silver-back mountain gorilla in Zaire, go bush walking with tribal guides in Uganda, climb Mount Kenya, ride a canoe on the Zambezi River or a traditional mokoro in the Okavango Delta. Most African safaris camp, and full camping equipment is provided. A few offer hotel and lodge accommodation throughout. Elsewhere, in Asia and South America, on trips which include game viewing - say, our tiger safari in India - we usually stay in hotels, resthouses and jungle lodges. In Darwin's famous Galapagos Islands we live aboard a small motor yacht.

Ethnic Encounters

A special highlight of an Explore Worldwide adventure is the opportunity it offers to meet ethnic or tribal peoples. These could be the 'Blue Men' or Tuareg of the Central Sahara, the Maya of Mexico, or the colourful Huli of Papua New Guinea. Some, like the Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert, are nomadic wanderers. Others, like the pygmies of the Ituri Forest, are hunter-gatherers; or dry rice farmers like the friendly hilltribe peoples of Northern Thailand. Many are often part of an 'Old World' culture. Their societies are often under serious threat from unscrupulous exploiters. We travel in small groups only. Our aim is to help spread tolerance and understanding between different races and peoples, with the minimum of culture and environmental disturbance.

Easy/Moderate Hiking

Many trips include a few days' easy walking through open countryside, based on rented or hotel accommodation; also village-to-village hiking which involves some trail walking with the prospect of overnighting along the way in private houses or basic village huts. You'll find such trips in Spain's Sierra Nevada, in Provence, Tuscany, Crete, Corsica, Greece, Morocco, Turkey, Bulgaria, Thailand, Bhutan, Nepal, Venezuela, and many other Explore Worldwide destinations. On long distance walks involving more than one day, all your main luggage is transported by a separate vehicle, or carried by porters or pack animals. You simply bring a daypack for your personal gear.

Major Treks

A limited number of major treks are offered for strong mountain walkers. These sometimes involve walking at elevations over 10,000 feet, with substantial altitude gains and losses during a single day. We may lodge with the local people or rough-camp in the world's great mountain ranges like the Atlas, Kackar, Himalayas and Andes. Or we use a mixture of well-appointed camp-sites and alpine chalets in more sophisticated mountain areas such as the Alps. Such trips usually involve support vehicles, porterage or pack animals. We rarely backpack or carry heavy gear.

Wilderness Experience

Discovering one of the world's remote wilderness areas is a thrilling and memorable experience - perhaps the ultimate travel adventure. Such places have a strong fascination for the intrepid traveller, holding out the prospect of exotic new horizons. We explore the haunting beauty of the Amazon Rainforest and experience the powerful mystique of the Sahara, Great Thor, Namib and Gobi Deserts. They offer a chance to participate in an adventure few people could ever dream of.

Sailtreks/Seatreks

These are among the most original and relaxing holidays in our brochure. We charter local boats and journey by traditional felucca sailboat through Upper Egypt; we utilise gulets (wooden motor yachts) in Turkey and island-to-island ferries in countries like Greece and Thailand. Our 2-masted schooner explores the islands of the Indonesian Archipelago, while a small motor yacht is chartered to cruise among the unique wildlife habitats of the Galapagos.

Raft and River Journeys

River journeys can last from a few hours to several days, and range from 2-person inflatables which participants paddle themselves (on the Dordogne River, for example) to all the fun, thrills and excitement of whitewater railing navigated by skilled oarsmen (such as on Peru's beautiful Urubamba River or the wild Trisuli River in Nepal). No previous experience is necessary and the appropriate safety skills are quickly learned. Our river trips in India, Africa and the Amazon offer us a unique insight into the fertile margins and exotic jungles.