Careers

Six people talk about their typical working day

A. Credit Card Executive

I get up at 6 am to arrive at the office around 7.30 am. I manage all the customer development programmes for our regular credit card users. My responsibilities include the launch and management of the Membership Rewards scheme in the major European markets. I have to keep in touch with existing card users, acquire new ones and build relationships with partner companies.
I use the first 45 minutes to organise my day and then I respond to any e-mail messages. I manage all the advertising for the membership programme across Europe, so I meet with our marketing staff and the advertising agencies to establish a strategy and work on future developments. I have meetings scheduled for most of the day, but at all other times I make sure I keep my door open for anyone to come and ask me questions.
There are nine customer service units around Europe and I have to travel to the different markets once or twice a week to discuss issues that come up. When I'm in London, I leave work between 6.30 pm and 7.00 pm.

B. Record Company Executive

I get to work for 10.00 am and go through the post - between ten and twenty demonstration tapes a day, letters from producers and information about concerts, as well as invoices from session musicians and studios. The phone starts ringing at about 10.30 am - producers, publishers and so on, and there are meetings arranged throughout the day to talk about campaigns or projects for a particular artist. This might involve the press, marketing and the managing director.
When I listen to demo tapes I am very aware that people are bringing in their life's work, so I try to be constructive. I instinctively know if the sound is appropriate for our record label. Once I've signed a band, we start on the first album - choosing the songs, producer, and additional musicians. Then I have to communicate my vision of the album to the rest of the company for marketing and selling. I also oversee budgets and spending.
I leave work at 7.00 pm at the earliest and most evenings I go to gigs - sometimes I see as many as five new groups a night. Sometimes after a gig I'll visit an artist in the studio. Most of my socialising evolves around my work. I often don't get home until 1.00 am - when I put on a record to help me wind down.

C. Sales Director

I get up at 8.00 am and drive to work to arrive at 9.30 am. I open the post, look through the diary to check if we're going to see any clients that day, then wait and see who turns up.
I love taking people round the showrooms - there's nothing better than reaching an agreement with someone, selling them a piece of furniture and knowing it's going to a good home. We sell antiques from PS1,000 to PS6,000 and buy from the London salerooms, country house sales, our private clients and overseas.
A lot of what we buy needs restoration. We have a full-time restorer in the shop, and I spend a lot of time liaising with gilders, picture framers and paper repairers. I read the Antiques Trade Gazette while I drink coffee at odd moments, to keep in touch with what's going on in the business, and I often pop into the Victoria and Albert museum to compare furniture.
I do the accounts one day every month and every three months I do the tax returns. At 5.30 pm I go home. It usually takes me about an hour to switch off.

D. Air Traffic Controller

I work a set shift pattern, and when I'm on an early shift I leave the house at 6.00 am. At 7.00 am I relieve the night shift and take over one of the four control positions in the tower.
We have a rotating timetable, which means that I work for about an hour and a half at one of the stations, go off for half an hour and then come back to a different station. The air traffic controllers, a supervisor and the watch manager all sit near to each other and work as a team, controlling the aircraft movements.
In winter we deal with about 1,000 movements a day, and even more in summer. Night shifts are much quieter, and I usually get a chance to read up on new air traffic requirements between 12 and 4.00 am.
It's important to be really switched on in this job, so even if I'm only a bit under the weather I have no qualms about being off sick. I find the work quite stressful and it can take a while to wind down at the end of a shift. Eventually I'd like to be watch manager, and then maybe even general manager of the airport.

E. Shop Manager

If I'm on an early shift, I leave the house by 8.00 am. The first thing I do is get the electronic point-of-sale system up and running.
I always make sure there's someone to watch the till and I co-ordinate people's lunches and breaks. I spend the morning helping customers, finding and ordering books for them. I enjoy serving customers, although it can be a bit annoying if they come in waving reviews and expect you to run around gathering a pile of books for them.
Between 2.00 pm and 4.00 pm most weekdays, publishers' reps come into the shop and I spend some time discussing new titles for the months ahead. I have to consider how many, if any, of a particular title the shop is likely to sell. When we want to feature a new title, it's essential that I make sure it's delivered in time.
The early shift finishes at 5.45 pm. Two days a week I do a late shift, and then I close down the computer system, lock up and go home.

F. Financial Analyst

I listen to the news at 7.00 am, then get up and take a taxi to arrive at work at 8.45 am. First I get in touch with our freelance reporters to find out what is happening in the region I'm responsible for.
I assess financial risk for multi-national companies operating abroad, so it is my job to try to warn clients well in advance of anything that could go wrong in that country. I provide three services: an on-line executive preview, or newsflash; a security forecast, which is an extended preview plus a forecast for the next six months; and a travel information security guide.
From 9.15 am to 9.30 am I meet with our editors to discuss the stories I'm going to follow. My first executive preview has to be on-line by 10.00 am and my second deadline is 11.00 am, so I have to be quick chasing up stories. I type them, send them through to my editor, who edits and approves them, then I re-check and make any necessary alterations before they go through the system. 
I travel to Africa about three times a year, to report on specific events or just to keep up with what is happening. I leave work at around 6.00 pm. It's quite difficult to switch off and most evenings I'm still awake at 1.00 am.