Is your office working ok?

Fresh air and the right chairs are the key to a happy, healthy workforce, according to a new survey. We went to four contrasting offices, to find out how healthy and happy they were as working environments. On our expert panel were a building health consultant; an ergonomist, who studies people's working conditions; and an occupational psychologist. Here are their verdicts.

Office A. Advertising Agency

Building Health Consultant: This office is about as simple as it could possibly be; no central heating, no mechanical ventilation, windows opening straight onto the street. It is difficult to see why this space works but the occupants who are part of a small, dynamic team, appear to have few complaints. They adapt to the changing seasons by opening doors and roof panels or switching on electric radiators -- pretty much, perhaps, as they do in their own homes. This may be the key: a team of seven people have crated a happy, homely working environment and do not have to put up with any externally imposed bureaucracy.
Ergonomist: The furniture here has evolved; no two pieces match. Much of it actually creates bad working postures. Chairs are old, most aren't adjustable and many are broken. Although in that way this environment is poor, the personnel have a varied work schedule, which they control -- office work, out meeting clients, making presentations, and so on. This variety reduces the risk of fatigue, boredom and muscular problems.
Occupational Psychologist: Staff are delighted with the variety of work and the versatility of the office space. They said their office was 'just the right size' -- small enough to know what colleagues are doing, large enough to be able to be on your own and focus on personal work. I found the office attractive and fun, simultaneously conveying images of efficiency and creativity.

Office B. News Service

Building Health Consultant: While the office may not be very exciting, it appears comfortable and is not disliked by the staff. The air quality and general maintenance standards appear to be good. This is helped by a No Smoking policy.
Ergonomist: I was not surprised to learn that the company had already employed the services of an ergonomist. Chairs are excellent, lighting and computer equipment are good. Space provision is good, although the layout could be improved. But the environments is impersonal and unstimulating, with grey, bare walls.
Occupational Psychologist: Walls are bare apart from year planners and a poster describing maternity rights. Most staff have been there for at least five years and relationships are satisfactory. The office could be improved if the desks were positioned to make the sharing of information easier. Proof of success or information on forthcoming projects could be displayed on the walls.

Office C. Bank

Building Health Consultant: An office that produces mixed reactions from those working in it. The feeling inside is akin to being in a glass case, viewed by, and viewing, countless similar exhibits. Despite a mix of smokers and non-smokers in a relatively small space, the air did not appear to be stale. Even standing only 1.5 metres away from a smoker, it was not possible to smell his cigarette. 
Ergonomist: The office area is, sadly, very standard and totally uninspiring. The desks are adequate, but only just. Not all the chairs being used for computer operation conform to requirements but this is user choice. Computer screens are often on small desk units with lowered keyboard shelves; this is no longer considered appropriate for modern equipment.
Occupational Psychologist: Staff are mutually supportive and well served by technology. Numerous communications awards are on display. The wood coloured panelling and brown carpet give a slightly sombre effect. The office is a buzz of activity.

Office D. Newspaper

Building Health Consultant: It is difficult to say anything good about this building. The air-conditioning control is very crude, resulting in large variations in temperature. The space is cluttered and most people have inadequate desk space. The office is very dusty -- there are plenty of places for dust to lodge. The shed-type roof also collects dust, which, if disturbed, showers those sitting below.
Ergonomist: The furniture would be more at home in a carpentry workshop than in a high-tech industry. Most of the chairs are of little value to keyboard users, particularly those who are shorter than about 1.75 m. Many chairs are old, lack suitable adjustment and have armrests that prevent the user from getting sufficiently close to the desk.
Occupational Psychologist: Old brown chairs, soiled carpets, dust and dirt everywhere. A lot of scope for improvement -- the place needs a good tidy-up, individual success could be more recognised, air conditioning needs to be improved immediately -- there are so many smokers. Few conversations were going on when we visited; everybody seemed stressed and driven by deadlines. The company needs to adopt a policy of team-working.