Plugging in the home

Georgina McGuiness had taken a long career break from journalism and she felt out of touch with the changes brought about by technology. She recounts here how she was able to transform the family home into an efficient workplace.

The Christmas before last I turned 37 and realised that time was running out if I wanted to resurrect a career in journalism - which I believed had been washed down the plug-hole ... the technological plug-hole.
A quick glance at my curriculum vitae showed that I was shamefully stuck in the 1980s, when a piece of carbon wedged in between several sheets of paper in a typewriter was the state of the art. It seemed that only a madman would let me loose on a computer in his newsroom. And why did most of the jobs advertised ask for experience in desktop publishing - which I didn't have?
I thought I had a better chance of hosting a seminar in nuclear physics than attempting to lay out a page on a computer. I was the family technophobe; even pocket calculators were a mystery to me and I still don't know how to use the timer on the video.
Clearly, there was a gaping hole in what was left of my career and I had to act quickly. Leaving home before the children did would be fraught with obstacles, or so I thought until I entered a competition in a local newspaper. Like a success story you read or hear about that only ever happens to other people, my family and I won a computer package.
Supplied with a laptop computer to free my husband from his desk, and a personal computer for us all, we dived in at the deep end into a strange new world and terms such as cyberspace, Internet and surfing became commonplace in our vocabulary. We took to chatting like old pals via the Internet to strangers around the world. The children forsook the television and I set up a mini-office in a corner of the kitchen with a telephone-answering facility, a fax machine, a CD-ROM, and a modem linking me into the information superhighway.
I had everything I would need for working from home - and I could still manage to take the children to school. They were confident with computers from the start, already well versed in them from school. I was much more hesitant, convinced that all my work would disappear without trace if I pressed the wrong button. I could not have been more wrong.
Though far from being adroit, I did manage to learn the basic skills I needed - il was all so logical, easy and idiot-proof. And, like everything that you persevere with, you learn a little more each day.
I recently began freelancing for a magazine, contributing about two articles a month, and I have become smug in the knowledge that I have the best of two worlds.
So how has the computer helped me? Since my schooldays I have always worked at a desk that can only be described as a chaotic mess. 
Consequently, I was always losing scraps of paper containing vital bits of information. The computer has transformed me into an organised worker, particularly when it comes to office administration.
Spreadsheets help keep a record of income and expenses, and pre-formatted invoices and letterheads have saved me a lol of time and effort. For a journalist, getting on-line with the Internet means I can research stories, ask for further information on the bulletin board in the journalism or publishing forums and even discuss the pros and cons of working from home with people from all over the world.
If all this sounds too good to be true, there is a dark side to computing from home. You can be in isolation from physical human contact. There are the distractions of putting urgent jobs about the house first, and when the children are home there are power struggles in our house over whose turn it is to use the computer.
However, there is a growing band of people who have recently bought multi-media PCs, not just for the educational, leisure and entertainment facilities. In my street alone there appears to be a new type of technical cottage industry evolving from the sheer convenience of not having to join the commuter struggle into the city each day. So what characterises home workers as we move into the next century?
A report entitled PC Usage in UK Homes provides the following profile of the millennium computer user: 38 and well educated; 93% own a personal computer and 32% have a CD-ROM device; 38% have a laser printer and 50% a modem.
Taking this into account, I seem to be well ahead of schedule. And who knows, one day I might be e-mailing a column to a newspaper in Melbourne or, better still, publishing my own magazine from home. It seems the sky, or should I say cyberspace is the limit.