RETREAT, RELAX, RECHARGE
Health farms and country house hotels offering spa facilities report that business is booming. We asked five journalists to check out some of the places that are available.

A. HENLOW GRANGE

I welcomed the opportunity to go to Henlow Grange for six days as I was tired and needed to relax. My room in the main part of the huge 18th-century house was the most comfortable possible and I was instantly soothed.
On Day One I did nothing and slept lots. But from Day Two I started going to body conditioning and doing as many classes as I could (stretch and tone, yoga, body alignment, to name but a few). All the instructors are highly trained. I couldn't believe how supple I began to feel as the week progressed.
They have every possible treatment, including aromatherapy (I've never been so relaxed), seaweed baths, manicures, and pedicures. The facial, which lasts for an hour, really does make you feel like a new person.
The staff in the treatment rooms deserve a bouquet. T hey couldn't have been friendlier, nicer or more professional. The whole atmosphere is one of vitality and enthusiasm. Henlow are planning a major refurbishment this year, which will include a half-size Olympic swimming pool and a Light Diet Room. Bicycles are available and you can ride around the grounds. If you're not feeling energetic and the weather's on your side, grab a magazine or enjoy a peaceful walk in the garden.
During my stay, my mood improved and so did my appetite. l left feeling wonderful and full of energy, which lasted for ages. I'm definitely due another visit. This is the perfect break for the stressed working woman. Save
Room 5 for me!
Marcella D'Argy Smith

B. SHRUBLAND HALL

The calm and relaxing atmosphere of this stately home was evident from the moment I climbed the vast staircase into the reception area. The Hall has an impressively decorated library, a charming conservatory and lots of space, so you don't have to speak to anyone if you don't want to.
On arrival everybody is given a medical, which includes an examination and a check on weight and blood pressure. We were all called patients, which I found a bit disquieting as I'm in good health. However, I was impressed that a shoulder problem discovered in the examination was immediately passed on to the fitness instructor and we worked on it in the group workshops and also in an extra session of individual instruction.
Each patient is given a specific diet to follow. Although I lost weight without fasting, I was still hungry enough to develop a fierce headache on the second day. A typical daily menu for me was a breakfast of grapefruit and honey, hot lemon and boiled water; a choice of salads for lunch; and a mixture of exotic fruit, yoghurt and a flask of hot broth for supper. If you're not fasting or on a light diet, then you'll eat in the main dining hall, where the food is tasty and nicely presented, so you needn't suffer too much! You have a massage or water therapy on alternate days. All extra treatments are competitively priced.
Liz Gregory

C. CAREYS MANOR

Careys is not a health farm and doesn't pretend to be. It's a fine old manor farm with inviting log fires and a spacious lounge. If you're counting calories, you'll have to miss out on the gourmet food. Rich sauces and delightful creamy confections are conjured up by the French chef. It's a good job the hotel has a fully-equipped gym and soft-water pool so I could work off some of the tempting indulgences. (You can opt for a 'health-conscious' diet if you really want to lose weight.) There is a spa bath, steam room, Swiss shower, sauna and treatment rooms. A big attraction is the sports injury clinic. I got an expert opinion on an old, sometimes painful, shoulder injury. The physiotherapist recommended good posture, remedial exercises and massage. Carey's manages to be comfortable and luxurious, laid-back and sedate. If you want to break out, there is great surrounding countryside to explore.
Beverly D'Silva

D. CLIVEDEN

Cliveden is a majestic country home and is also a five-star hotel that treats its guests like royalty. It offers health and beauty treatments, a well-equipped gym, saunas, swimming pool, tennis, horse riding, and much more. There are stunning woodland walks and gardens around the 376-acre National Trust estate.
And there's Waldo's, a highly-acclaimed restaurant with dishes to make you clutch your stomach. In ecstasy. It took me half an hour to read the dinner menu; the choice was staggering. The meal was wonderful, especially the sticky-toffee pudding with banana ice-cream. I climbed into bed a happy woman!
Next morning I dutifully spent a few hours in the gym playing with exercise equipment to burn off a few calories in time for my next meal. In the Pavilion I enjoyed a facial with gentle heat and essential oils. Then I had an aromatherapy massage. 
I thought of all the other reports my fellow journalists would make, about fitness assessments, workouts, and beauty treatments to tone and firm the body. Cliveden has all these if you want to use them -- before indulging yourself at Waldo's.
Kay Letch

E. SPRINGS HYDRO

The best and the worst thing about Springs Hydro is the carrot cake. The best because it really is the most delicious I've ever tasted. The worst, because it's a huge slab of 360 calories, which sets you back if you want to lose weight. You have been warned! The second best thing is the fabulous aromatherapy massage. I chose the relaxing oils blend, dropped off to sleep twice during the massage, floated back to my room and had my most refreshing night's sleep in years.
The premises are modern and purpose-built, efficiently run, with up-to-the-minute facilities and luxurious bedrooms. There are plenty of therapists and beauty rooms so there's little difficulty in scheduling appointments. A variety of treatments are on offer, from manicures and pedicures to deep-cleansing facials and body treatments. The guests are an eclectic mix -- from entire football teams to mums and daughters, best friends and singles. Ideally, I would have a break here about once a month.
Eve Cameron