Science flying in the face of gravity

Journalist Tom Mumford joins students using weightlessness to test their theories.

It looked like just another aircraft from the outside. The pilot told his young passengers that it was built in 1964, a Boeing KC-135 refuelling tanker, based on the Boeing 707 passenger craft.
But appearances were deceptive and the 13 students from Europe and America who boarded were in for the flight of their lives. Inside, it had become a long white tunnel.
There were almost no windows, but it was eerily illuminated by lights along the padded walls. Most of the seats had been ripped out, apart from a few at the back, where the pale-faced, budding scientists took their places with the air of condemned men.
For 12 months, they had competed with other students from across the continent to participate in the flight. The challenge, offered by the European Space Agency, had been to suggest imaginative experiments to be conducted in weightless conditions.
Those with the best ideas won a place on this unusual flight, which is best described as the most extraordinary roller-coaster ride yet devised. For the next two hours the Boeing's flight would resemble that of an enormous bird which had lost its reason, shooting upwards towards the heavens before hurtling towards Earth.
The intention was to achieve a kind of state of grace at the top of each curve. As the pilot cuts the engines at 3,000 metres, the aircraft throws itself still higher by virtue of its own momentum before gravity takes over and it plummets earthwards again.
In the few silent seconds between ascending and falling, the aircraft and everything inside it become weightless, and the 13 students would, in theory, feel themselves closer to the moon than the Earth. The aircraft took off smoothly enough, but any lingering illusions the young scientists and I had that we were on anything like a scheduled passenger service were quickly dispelled when the pilot put the Boeing into a 45-degree climb which lasted around 20 seconds. The engines strained wildly, blood drained from our heads, and bodies were scattered across the cabin floor.
Then the engines cut out and the transition to weightlessness was nearly instantaneous. For 20 seconds we conducted a ghostly dance in the unreal silence:the floor had become a vast trampoline, and one footstep was enough to launch us headlong towards the ceiling.
We floated aimlessly; the idea of going anywhere was itself confusing. Left or right, up or down, no longer had any meaning. Only gravity, by rooting us somewhere, permits us to appreciate the possibility of going somewhere else.
After ten seconds of freefall descent, the pilot pulled the aircraft out of its nose dive. The return of gravity was less immediate than its loss, but was still sudden enough to ensure that some of the students came down with a bump.
Our first curve completed, there were those who turned green at the thought of the 29 to follow. Thirty curves added up to ten minutes 'space time' for experiments and the Dutch students were soon studying the movements of Leonardo, their robotic cat, hoping to discover how it is that cats always land on their feet.
At the appropriate moment the device they had built to investigate this was released, floating belly-up, and one of the students succeeded in turning it belly-down with radio-controlled movements. The next curve was nearly its last, however, when another student landed on top of it during a less well managed return to gravitational pull.
Next to the slightly stunned acrobatic robocat, a German team from the University of Aachen investigated how the quality of joins in metal is affected by the absence of gravity, with an eye to the construction of tomorrow's space stations.
Another team of students, from Utah State University, examined the possibility of creating solar sails from thin liquid films hardened in ultra-violet sunlight. Their flight was spent attempting to produce the films under microgravity. They believe that once the process is perfected, satellites could be equipped with solar sails that use the sun's radiation just as a yacht's sails use the wind. 
After two hours spent swinging between heaven and Earth, that morning's breakfast felt unstable, but the predominant sensation was exhilaration, not nausea.
This was a feeling that would stay with us for a long time. 'It was an unforgettable experience,' said one of the students. 'I was already aiming to become an astronaut, but now I want to even more.'