Seven Up

Mountaineer Doug Scott shares with his readers the mystical experience of conquering the highest peak on each continent: the Seven Summits.

My quest to climb the Seven Summits came late in life. I will take them in the order of my climbing them.

A. Mt. Everest, Asia (8,848m)

We were in a snow cave 91m below the summit when my climbing partner, Dougal Haston, began a conversation with Dave Clark, our Equipment Officer, about the relative merits of various sleeping bags. I thought this was strange, as only Dougal and I were present. Putting this down to oxygen deprivation, I then found myself talking to my feet. Already the cold was getting into the balls of my feet and I recalled other climbers who had lost fingers and toes from frostbite. It wasn't survival that was worrying us so much as the quality of our survival.
Over the next two days I relived our time spent on the summit ridge. I realised that I couldn't have been there with a better man than Dougal Hatton. He inspired great confidence in me and by now I was climbing with a calm presentiment mat somehow or other it was all going to work out. I realised I had to get a better rhythm going in order to reach the summit - which is what I did.

B. Mt. McKinley, North America (6,194m)

This mountain is regarded as the most treacherous in the world. In April 1976 Dougal and I arrived at the Kahiltna Glacier and spent four days humping equipment and food up to the base. Only after the first day of climbing did we realise the enormity of our undertaking. On the lower face we followed a route put up in 1967, but at half height we pursued a new route, as planned, heading directly for the upper snow basin and the summit. We decided to climb
'alpine style', with our equipment and food on our backs. It would be the first time a major new route had been climbed here in such a way.
We climbed up the compressed snow of an avalanche scar to camp under a rocky cliff and by the third day my sleeping bag was sodden. We spent the third night on a windswept ridge; by now we were both suffering. Mt. McKinley, because the air pressure in the polar regions is lower, has an impact on the body out of all proportion to its altitude. It seemed to us that we were up at around 7,000m, instead of 6,100m. We packed our bags and finally staggered onto the summit and down the other side, triumphant.

C. Kilimanjaro, Africa (5,89Sm)

In September 1976, Paul Braithwaite and I flew to Nairobi with the intention of climbing Mt. Kenya. It was though the unexpected offer of a free ride to the Tanzanian side of Kilimanjaro that we came to climb Africa's highest mountain.
On our approach we got ourselves lost in the dense jungles of the lower slopes. Our situation became serious because water is scarce. On the second day we came across luminous arrows painted on trees and a trail of rubbish which brought us to a rock pool. Never before had I been so pleased to find rubbish on a mountain.
We attempted a direct start to the breach wall, which is a 305m-high icicle. After a deluge of falling rock and ice we prudently retired and opted instead for the Umbwe route to gain the surrealistic summit.

D. Aconcagua, South America (6,960m)

The original and now standard route up Aconcagua is little more than a walk. In January 1992, I arrived with my wife, Sharu, at Punta del Inca and was pleasantly surprised to meet fellow mountaineer and guide, Phil Erscheler. He was taking a party up the mountain via the Polish Glacier, away from the busy standard route, and suggested that we go with them.
After three days of sitting out bad weather, we left base camp. The Polish Glacier stretching up to the summit had been swept by vicious winds and glistened with pure ice. With a time limit to get back to Buenos Aires for our flight, we decided to miss out on the glacier. Instead we went across the north ridges towards the standard route and joined the large number of people wandering along the path. The wind was strong as we walked the last few metres to the summit and just before it got dark we camped outside the refuge.
Back at base camp we met eight members of the Jakarta Mountaineering Club. They were planning to climb the Seven Summits and felt, when they learnt that I had already climbed four, that I should do me same. This was the first time I had seriously thought about such goal-orientation -- something I had previously tried to avoid.

E. Vinson Massif, Antarctica (4,897m)

When I learnt that climbing Vinson Massif was just a matter of guiding enough people in order to finance the cost of getting there, attempting all of the Seven Summits became a reality. Our team left Britain towards the end of November 1992 and travelled the thousands of kilometres to the South Pole. At this time of the year the sun is always well above the horizon, throughout the day and night, and when the wind stops blowing it is utterly quiet. As in other polar regions, in the keen, clean air, there is such an invigorating atmosphere that the spirits are raised just by being there. On December 7 we left camp and headed off towards the summit. Against expectations, with winds gusting at around 80 kms per hour and temperatures below minus 50degC, we all got to the top within 8 hours. Our elation was somewhat tempered by visibility being down to just a few metres in the storm.

F. Elbrus, Europe (5,633m)

Our team assembled in St Petersburg during the early summer of 1994. On our arrival at the settlement of Terskol, beneath Elbrus, a commission was demanded from our guide for bringing foreigners into the valley, though this was later waived. 
After a few days' acclimatising, the group set off up Elbrus by cableway to 3,900m. From there we walked to the refuge at 4,200m. Two days later, the wind buffered us as we crossed open slopes, some of them glassy ice. By mid-
afternoon we reached what we thought was the summit. But we found there was another kilometre-long ridge to the actual summit. As night fell, we returned to the refuge and the next day descended this, fortunately extinct, volcano.

G. Carstensz Pyramid, Australasia (4,883m)

On our expedition to Carstensz we hoped not only to establish a new route but to spend as much time as possible with the aboriginal Dani people. The largest gold mine in the world is cutting into the mountain, regarded as sacred by the local tribespeople.
We had been warned that we might be taken hostage or even killed by bandits but, undeterred, we left our hut by mid-morning and walked down winding lanes towards the jungle. On May 12 we stayed climbing. The weather improved and two of the team hared ahead. We were slower, since Sham was filming. Climbing in rock shoes, we reached the summit by 11 am. 
I was given a standing ovation on this, my seventh summit. Mission accomplished!