The pen is mightier than the psychoanalyst

The study of handwriting to reveal a person's character is gaining support

If you applied for a job in some countries, you would almost certainly be asked for a sample of your handwriting. And it would be the handwriting, as much as anything else, that would determine your suitability for the job.
Handwriting analysis, or graphology, is accepted as a genuine science in many countries. Researchers say it can be a useful tool in indicating certain illnesses, such as heart disease and cancer, and can reveal psychological states and emotional disturbances.
Handwriting analysis is increasingly being used for vocational guidance and as an adjunct to interviews. Many big companies now employ graphologists to analyse the handwriting of potential candidates for key jobs.
But most doctors and psychiatrists remain dubious about the value of graphology. Patricia Marne, a professional graphologist for more than 20 years, argues that they should take it more seriously. She believes that handwriting can indicate psychological characteristics as well as certain medical conditions.
She says: 'Handwriting is a powerful indicator of social class and intelligence. But more than that, it can be used to assess mental ability and potential, whether a person should concentrate on arts or sciences, and whether they have a devious or open character.'
According to Ms Marne, graphology can be particularly useful in assessing possible criminal tendencies: 'Criminals all have disturbed handwriting, mostly illiterate and poorly-shaped. Most criminals come from deprived backgrounds and have arrested emotional development. This often shows up in unusually childish handwriting and in going over letters several times.

The person behind the handwriting: examples analysed by graphologist Patricia Marne. 'I can tell whether people are honest, manipulators, or reliable employees.'

'Young male offenders frequently have very high ascenders, indicating that they live in a world of fantasy and dream of making it big. Graphologists can tell whether violence is about to erupt, whether the writer is under unbearable pressure, and whether there are psychopathic tendencies. Handwriting can be used to predict would-be suicides.'
Heart and lung problems can also show up, she says. 'You can't make a diagnosis from one sample, unless the writing is obviously shaky or disturbed. But if over a period of time it changes or becomes disjointed, if there's a break in the signature which did not exist previously, that could be a sign that something quite serious has occurred.'
A severe emotional upset can also show up in a temporarily altered signature, she maintains.
Ms Marne says handwriting can be used to reveal other psychological characteristics. People with writing in which letters form 'threads' instead of being individually forms are, apparently, devious and clever. Those who write mainly in capitals are trying to conceal their true selves from others. Very light pressure indicates sensitivity and lack of vitality. Originality in handwriting - how far the writer has deviated from copybook script - indicates confidence and artistic ability. Disconnected writing is the cardinal sign of the loner.
Very small signatures indicate inhibition and an inferiority complex; circles over the 'i' are a bid for attention, and crossing the 't' heavily over the whole word is a sign of intolerance and a patronising attitude.
Ms Marne says it takes six years of study and experience to be able to analyse handwriting accurately, and this has to be combined with empathy and intuition. She feels that more research is needed to put graphology on a proper scientific footing.
This will happen soon, she believes. 'It's actually far more accurate than psychoanalysis, as you can tell the whole history of the person, including all their emotional crises, without asking them questions to which they may give wrong answers.'
Interesting as all this may sound, there is little hard evidence to support such claims. Some psychiatrists are highly critical of them. Handwriting, they say, is a product of education, artistic ability and the type of writing taught - and has no other significance.