The end of print may take some time 

Peter Preston 

Transition. It's a pleasant word and a calming concept. Change may frighten some and challenge others. But transition means going surely and sweetly from somewhere present to somewhere future. Unless, that is, it is newspapers' 'transition' to the online world, an uncertain and highly uncomfortable process - because, frankly, it may not be a process at all. 
But surely (you say) it is bound to happen eventually. Everybody knows that print newspaper sales are plummeting while visits to the same papers' websites keep on soaring. Just look at the latest print circulation figures. The Daily Telegraph, The Guardian and many of the rest are down overall between 8% and 10% year-on-year, but their websites go ever higher. 
All of which may well be true, depending on timing, demography, geography and more. After all, everyone - from web academics to print analysts - says so. Yet pause for a while and count a few little things that don't quite fit.
So if sales in that area have fallen so little, perhaps the crisis mostly affects newspapers? Yet again, though, the messages are oddly mixed. The latest survey of trends by the World Association of Newspapers shows that global circulation rose 1.1% last year (to 512 million copies a day). Sales in the West dropped back but Asia more than made up the difference. 
As for news and current affairs magazines - which you'd expect to find in the eye of the digital storm - they had a 5.4% increase to report. In short, on both sides of the Atlantic, although some magazine areas went down, many showed rapid growth. 
You can discover a similar phenomenon when it comes to books. Kindle and similar e-readers are booming, with sales up massively this year. The apparent first step of transition couldn't be clearer. 
Yet, when booksellers examined the value of the physical books they sold over the last six months, they found it just 0.4% down. Screen or paper, then? It wasn't one or the other: it was both. 
Tales like these of young people abandoning newspaper-reading are wildly exaggerated. Turn to the latest National Readership Survey figures and you'll find nearly 5,000,000 people aged between 15 and 35 following the main national dailies. 
And even within Europe, different countries have different stories to tell. There's Britain, with a 10.8% drop in recent years (and a 19.6% fall for quality papers), but in Germany the decline has only been 7% all round - with a mere 0.8% lost to quality titles. And France shows only a 3.1% fall (0.8% at the quality end of the market). 
Such varying national trends may well reflect a situation far more complicated than the prophets of digital revolution assume. America's media analysts used to argue that booming online advertising revenues would pay for change and, along with lower production costs, make online newspapers a natural success. But now, with digital advertisements on newspaper sites actually dropping back, such assumptions seem like history. 
Already 360 US papers - including most of the biggest and best - have built paywalls around their products. However, the best way of attracting a paying readership appears to be a deal that offers the print copy and digital access as some kind of joint package. 
In other words, print is also a crucial tool in selling internet subscriptions. And its advertising rates raise between nine and ten times more money than online. 
Of course this huge difference isn't good news for newspaper companies, as maintaining both an active website and an active print edition is difficult, complex and expensive. But newspaper brands still have much of their high profile in print; adrift on the web, the job of just being noticed becomes far harder. 