I may be too old for this lark, but here goes!
At 34, Tim Pozzi has left a good job to go backpacking. He ponders what has made him -- and others of hi sage -- take the plunge.
This summer, I quit my job and resolved to rent out my flat and go travelling in South East Asia for a yeaL You might think I'm lucky, but I'm 34 years old, and I'm nervous.
It's not as if I haven't done the travelling thing before. After university, I spent two years backpacking around North and South America, and when I returned. was determined to do it again some day, But you know how it is ... I fell in love, embarked on a career, bought a Hat and got used to earning a salary. But I gradually realised I had been sacrificing my own sense of worth for my salary. When I handed in that letter of resignation, it felt as though I'd taken charge of my life again.
I now have no tics. Many of my friends are now married with children and, while they wouldn't swap places with me, they envy me my lack of responsibilities. I'm no longer in a relationship, and I have no burning career ambitions. I feel almost obliged to make the most of that freedom - if only for my friends' sake!
Why am I so nervous? In the first place, 1t's a question of making the necessary arrangements. How could I bear to have someone else living in my home? And how would I go about organising the letting? And apart from anything else, I had to decide where to go.
T'm a shocking procrastinator. and am already several weeks behind my intended schedule. 'Might as well enjoy the summer in England,' I told myself. Then, 'Why not hang around for the start of the football season?' Severing emotional ties makes it even more difficult.
I'm putting it off because, deep down, I wonder if I can still cope with backpacking. Will I be able to readjust to a more basic wav of life? Will I feel out of place among a community of backpackers fresh out of school and university?
Perhaps not. I've discovered it's increasingly common for Britons in their late twenties and thirties to want to disentangle themselves from the lives they've made for themselves and head ofT for foreign climes.
Jennifer Cox, of Lonely Planet guidebook publishers, identifies a growing awareness that adventure is there for the raking: 'The penny's dropped. The sort of people who always say "I wish I'd had that opportunity" are realising that they can have it any time they want. They just have to be brave enough and organised enough and confident enough to do it.'
1-'0I' Danny, a 30-year-old accountant, and his girlfriend Tammy, a 28-year-old teacher, it's a chance to have a final fling before settling down. They have bought 'I round-the-world ticket for a year. 'I'm prepared to sacrifice job security to have the trip,' says Danny. 'There's always a niggling thought at the back of your mind that. "OK, I'm not moving up the career ladder, I'm going to be in the same position I was in before when I come back," but I think it's a risk you have to take, When I left the office, I threw my calculator into the river as a ceremonial act of defiance!'
For Matt, who'd just got out of the Army, the year he spent travelling amounted to a period of metamorphosis. 'When you're in the military, there's a set wav of doing things, a pattern to the way you approach problems. I went away because I really needed to temper this, and get rid of this approach in some cases, in order to have a reasonable existence as a civilian.'
While there are as many reasons to go travelling at my time of life as there are travellers, there do seem to be common factors. 'We have a much more flexible workforce today,' says Angela Baron of the Institute of Personnel Development. 'There are more people working on short-term contracts and so if your contract's just come to an end you've got nothing to lose.' Larger companies are even adopting career-break policies. 'If you've spent a lot of time and money training someone, it's nice to know they're coming back at some point rather than going to work for a competitor.'
For Dan Hiscocks, managing director of Travellerseye, a publishing company that specialises in the tales of 'ordinary' travellers, an increasing number of thirty-somethings are taking stock of their lives. 'If you're nor happy doing what you're doing - and many people aren't - it's no longer a question of just seeing it through. Now people are aware that opportunities exist and that a job isn't "for life" any more. Travel offers a chance to reassess, to take a step back and think about your life.'
Is giving in to wanderlust just another example of my generation's inability to come to terms with adulthood? Jennifer Cox thinks nor. 'It's a sign of a better educated, more stable society when we're less concerned with paving the bills than wanting to live a balanced life. We're actually taking the time to ask "Is this what I want?"
Ben, a 32-year-old picture researcher heading off to Central America for a year , does nor believe he's running away. 'It's more a case of running towards something. It's trying to grab some things that I want for myself' But he does feel some trepidation. 'It's the thought of what I'm leaving behind, that comfortable routine - just the act of going into the office every day. saying "hi" to everyone and sitting down with a cup of coffee.'
I share Ben's reservations about leaving behind an ordered life with few challenges and I'm nor sure I'd be making this journey if [ hadn't found my boss so intolerable. As Jennifer Cox points out: 'This is fairly typical. There's often a catalyst. like the break-up of a relationship or the loss of a job. Such an event can push people to go and do it.'
It may have taken a helpful kick up the backside to get me moving, but I'm now approaching the next 12 months with a mounting sense of excitement. Whatever the outcome, I'll be able to take satisfaction in having grabbed life by the horns. And in that I'm sure I speak for all of us ageing backpackers.
