A trumpet isn't just for Christmas...

It is strange how many musicians, even leading ones, come from homes without music. Out of the blue, Hakan Hardenberger, the only son of totally unmusical parents in a country district of southern Sweden, has at the age of 30 established himself as unique among the world's trumpet-players today.
His records are continually opening up new repertory, not just concertos by long-neglected composers of the baroque and classical periods, but new works too. When you meet him, bright-eyed and good-looking, he seems even younger than his years, as fresh and open in his manner as the sound of the trumpet.
Recently in one of London's premier concert halls he played the Hummel Trumpet Concerto, something of a party-piece for him, while on television a whole feature was devoted to his work and development, filmed both here and in Sweden.
Born near Malmo, he owes his career to the accident of a Christmas present when he was only eight.
His father, unmusical but liking Louis Armstrong's playing, had the idea of giving his only son a trumpet. Being a serious man, he didn't pick a toy trumpet, but took advice and bought a genuine grown-up instrument.
The success of the gift was instant. The boy never stopped playing. His mother managed to contact the second trumpet-player in the Malmo Symphony Orchestra, whom she persuaded to give her son lessons.
Bo Nilsson was an up-and-coming musician, and at once spotted natural talent. Hardenberger consistently blesses his luck to have got such a teacher right from the start, one who was himself so obsessed with the trumpet and trumpet-playing that he would search out and contact players all over the world, and as a 'trumpet fanatic' was 'always looking for another mouthpiece'.
There the mature Hardenberger has to draw a line between himself and his teacher. 'The trumpet is so primitive an instrument,' he explains, 'that you can't build a trumpet that is acoustically perfect. Whatever you do, it will have imperfections. Besides, you can't find two mouthpieces exactly the same. To me it is a matter of getting to know the imperfections and making a relationship with them.'
From the very start Hardenberger seems to have had the gift of finding the right compromise, and making that relationship. Without any sense of boasting, he explains that even in his boyhood years the characteristic Hardenberger sound was already recognisable, 'the first thing I acquired'.
And unlike the great British contender among virtuoso trumpet-players, John Wallace, who developed originally from a brass-band background and then through working in orchestras, Hardenberger has always thought of himself as a solo artist pure and simple.
From early boyhood he had as a role-model the French trumpeter, Maurice Andre, another player who bypassed the orchestra. The boy bought all his records, and idolised him.
His parents gave him every chance to practise, and went along with his ambition to make trumpet-playing a career. It was then a question of where, at 15, he should be sent to study. America, Bo Nilsson's first choice, was thought to be too far away and too dangerous, which meant that he went instead at the age of 16 to study in Paris with Pierre Thibaud. Thibaud confirmed his prejudice against going into an orchestra, saying that 'Playing in the orchestra is like digging in the garden.'
He was objective enough about himself to know that he played the trumpet better than others of his age, but it was only at the end of the first competition he entered, at the age of 17 during his first year in Paris, that he came to realise that in addition he had a particular gift of communicating.
Thibaud suggested that he should enter the competition just for experience. Hardenberger learned the pieces for the first round only, but he won through to the second. Luckily he already knew most of the pieces in that round too, but on getting through to the final he was faced with a concerto that had already daunted him. He didn't win first prize that time, but he enjoyed the performance, realising that though he 'played like a pig', people did listen to him.
Quoted like that, Hardenberger's realism about his work and his career may sound arrogant, but that would be a totally false impression. Thoughtfully he refuses to try and analyse what such a gift of communication might consist of, as 'You risk destroying it in trying to explain. The power of the music lies in the fact that it can always move people.'