Fame and Fortune
Imogen Edwards-Jones interviews some of the new British talent, from poet to pop star, heading for the top
A
Nick Grosso, in his early 30s, is the author of three critically acclaimed plays. He is currently adapting his first play, Peaches, into a screenplay. 'It's low budget but we don't know how low,' he explains. 'It certainly won't be over PS30 million, but then it could be 30 quid.'
Although obviously gifted, the most extraordinary thing about Nick is that before he wrote Peaches he had never been to or read a play in his life, 'When I wrote the play, I never even imagined it would get put on,' he says. 'It's set in a car. I probably wouldn't do that now because I know the logistical problems. I knew absolutely nothing then.'
He left school at 16, only to return a year later, After A-levels, he enrolled at the Young People's Theatre, 'I realised I wanted to write for actors. I wanted my writing to be heard rather than read because of the rhythm and rhyme,' he says, 'Suddenly I was surrounded by like-minded people. It was the first time I'd been in an educational environment and actually enjoyed myself. It was very stimulating.'
B
Comedian Simon Pegg, 28, has come a long way in his career since studying drama at Bristol University. He is currently writing a television comedy series, and has just finished a punishing tour around the country with comedy star Steve Coogan,
He's always worked hard, Even as far back as Bristol, he was honing his art in comedy clubs. 'It was very theoretical at university,' remembers Simon, 'It made me realise I didn't want to be a straight actor and that I'd always been more interested in comedy, People think that comedy is the hardest job in the world and it really isn't. If you've got the courage and you've got good material, it's a wonderful thing to make people laugh.'
He has performed with the comic am Funny Business, but his relationship with Steve Coogan that has proved the most fruitful. 'He saw my show and, as I was a huge fan of his, he could probably see me mimicking him,' admits Simon. 'It was comedy clubs. 'It was very theoretical at university.' remembers Simon, 'It made me realise I didn't want to be a straight actor and that I'd always been more interested in comedy. People think that comedy is the hardest job in the world and it really isn't. If you've got the courage and you've got good material, it's a wonderful thing to make people laugh.'
C
Ciaran McMenamin, 24, came to the public's attention when he disco-danced into their living rooms as the lead in the series The Young Person's Guide To Becoming A Rock Star, The critical reaction was extremely positive and his subsequent rise has been meteoric. 'It's been a really good showcase for me,' he says with a smile, 'I'm now in a situation where I can pick and choose what I do, which is what I've always wanted.' It is an unusually comfortable position to be in, especially when you consider that he has only just graduated, But glance at Ciaran's early career, and it's obvious such recognition was always on the cards.
Encouraged by his mother, he went from playing lead roles at school to the Ulster Youth Theatre, where he stayed for four years, 'Basically I was using acting as an excuse not to do homework,' laughs Ciaran. 'But I suddenly decided I wanted to make a go of it because I had a knack for it, and a passion for it.'
Now he is more or less sitting back and waiting for the plaudits to roll in - but ask him what he thinks of the fame game and he suddenly becomes pensive, 'When you're 18, you think you'll love the photos and the interviews but you soon realise it's not what you're acting for. It's not about that, It's about getting respect for doing good work.'
D
Neil Taylor, 25, is the lead singer in the pop band Matrix, which has just signed a three- album deal with Domino Records, Neil and the other half of Matrix, Rick Brown, are already tipped to be huge when their single, Chimera, is released shortly, 'The record company's idea of good sales is very different to mine,' he says, 'They're talking smash hit, but I've no idea, For me, if two people buy it, I'll be happy.'
Unlike so many new pop sensations, Neil has actually worked very hard for his success, He left school at 16 and has been trying to break into the music business ever since, 'It's funny how things happen,' he says, 'I'd been slogging away doing student gigs for eight years and I was starting to get a bit jaded, I was just about to give up when this happened.' By 'this' he means meeting Rick Brown, who already had contacts at Domino, and forming Matrix, It couldn't have happened at a better time, 'There were times when I was thoroughly depressed - and I've been in some atrocious bands, But hopefully it will all have been worth it.'
E
Poet and author Stephen Richards is 27 years old and has won more prizes, awards and academic honours than anyone twice his age, He is already well known on the poetry circuit, where he has been touring and giving several readings a week for the past six years, Now his first novel, Hidden, will be published in March, 'It's a story of obsessive love. It was a very strong idea that I couldn't do as a poem.'
Stephen was a huge fan of creative writing at school, but became disenchanted with education later on, 'I decided not to go to university but it wasn't until I became very bored with stuffing envelopes at a theatre that I decided I should.' After university, he published his first work, a children's book, in 1992, 'I don't think my parents expected me to be a writer - they always thought I'd be a reader because that's all I did as a child.' With his poetry receiving such critical acclaim, his move into novels is indeed brave. 'There's a framework with my poetry and less scope for me to do something hideously wrong,' he explains. 'Because a novel can be any length of words, there are more words that could be bad words. My main ambition is not to get into a pattern where I'm just churning stuff out without worrying about the quality.'
