Emotional Intelligence - The Key to Success
Daniel Goleman examines the 'people skills' that are essential for a place at the top of your profession
A
The rules for work are changing, We are being judged by a new yardstick - not just by how clever we are, or by our training and expertise, but also by how well we handle ourselves and each other. This yardstick is increasingly used in choosing who will be hired and who will not, who will be passed over and who will not. The new rules can he used to indicate who is likely to become a star performer and who is more prone to mediocrity. And, no matter what field we work in currently, they measure the trait- that are crucial to our marketability for future jobs, These rules have little to do with what we were told at school was important. The ability to do well in examinations is largely irrelevant to this standard. The new measure takes it for granted that we all have enough intellectual ability and technical knowhow to do our jobs. It focuses instead on social skills and personal qualities, such as initiative and empathy, adaptability and persuasiveness - the 'people skills' that make up what is now commonly referred to as emotional intelligence.
B
In a time when few guarantees of job security have led to the very concept of a 'job' being rapidly replaced by 'portable skills', personal qualities begin to play an important role in the workplace. Talked about loosely for decades under a variety of names, from 'character' and 'personality' to 'soft skills', there is, at last, a more precise understanding of these human talents as well as a new name tor them. 'Emotional intelligence' is generally defined as the ability to monitor and regulate one's own and others' feelings, and to use feelings to guide thought and action. In our work-life it comprises basic elements: self-awareness, self-regulation, motivation, empathy and adeptness in social relationships. There is a common assumption that it simply means 'being nice', However, at strategic moments it may demand not 'being nice', but rather, for example, bluntly confronting someone with the uncomfortable truth. Nor does emotional intelligence mean giving free rein to feelings - 'letting it all hang out'. Rather, it means managing feeling so that they are expressed appropriately and effectively, enabling people to work together smoothly towards their common goal.
C
More and more businesses are seeing that encouraging emotional intelligence skills is a viral component of management philosophy. And the less straightforward the job, the more emotional intelligence matters - if only because a deficiency in these abilities can hinder the use of whatever technical expertise or intellect a person may have. There are many examples of people who have risen to the top notwithstanding flaws in emotional intelligence, but as work becomes more complex and collaborative, companies where people work together best have a competitive edge. In the new workplace, with its emphasis on teamwork and a strong customer orientation, this crucial set of emotional competencies is becoming increasingly essential for excellence in every job and in every part of the world.
D
Whereas one's IQ undergoes few changes, emotional intelligence continues to develop as we go through life and learn from our experiences: our competence in it can keep growing. In fact, studies that have measured people's emotional intelligence through the years show that most people grow more adept at handling their own emotions and impulses, at motivating themselves and at honing their empathy and social adroitness. There is an old-fashioned word for this growth in emotional intelligence: maturity. Not only can emotional intelligence be learnt, but individually we can add these skills to our tool kit for survival. This is especially relevant at a time when it seems a contradiction to put the words 'job' and 'stability' together. Emotional intelligence is no magic formula for uncompetitive organisations, no guarantee of more market share or a healthier bottom line. But if the human ingredient is ignored, then nothing else works as well as it might.