Dorothy who?
The only British woman scientist to win the Nobel prize should be a household name in her own country, says Georgina Ferry, but she is little known
For the past four years, I have been subjecting friends and acquaintances to the Dorothy Hodgkin test. It's very simple: when asked what I am working on, I tell them I am writing the first biography of Dorothy Hodgkin. If their eyes light up, and they say things like 'Surely there's one already!' they have passed.
Why should people in Britain know about Dorothy Hodgkin? The fact that she is the only British woman scientist to have won a Nobel prize ought to be enough. Anyone who held the same distinction in literature would be a household name. But Hodgkin, who died in 1994, was a remarkable individual by any standards, as many-faceted as the crystals she studied. Her life reflects some of the greatest upheavals of the 20th century: among them, the advancement of women's education and the globalisation of science.
When I began my research, I set out to read some scientific biographies. One of Hodgkin's friends recommended a new biography of Linus Pauling. Pauling was a close friend and contemporary of Hodgkin, worked in the same branch of science and shared a commitment to campaigning against nuclear weapons. I hurried to the main bookshop in the university town where I live, only to discover that not a single biography of Pauling was on the shelves. I now realise I was naive to be surprised that Pauling was not deemed sufficiently interesting to British readers, even though he was the most influential chemist of the 20th century and a winner of Nobel prizes for both chemistry and peace.
Even scientists themselves have doubted the value of the scientific biography. 'The lives of scientists, considered as Lives, almost always make dull reading', wrote the late Peter Medawar, another Nobel laureate, who laid most of the scientific groundwork that now makes organ transplants possible.
If scientists propagate this negative view, it is hardly surprising if publishers and booksellers share it. Treating scientists differently from everybody else as biographical subjects is one of the outstanding symptoms of the 'two cultures' mentality, the belief that there is an unbridgeable divide of understanding between the arts and sciences, still prevalent in the literary world. Few but the towering giants of science make it into the biography sections of bookshops.
Of course it is nonsense to say scientists, as a group, lead less interesting lives than artists and writers, or actors, or politicians. For some, the fastidiousness involved in maintaining scientific credibility extends to any kind of media appearance. A leading geneticist once told me he was happy to be interviewed about his work, but did not want to be quoted directly or photographed, because he did not want to be perceived as 'self-promoting'.
The avoidance of the personal conveys a false impression of the enterprise of science that discourages young people from joining in, and fosters more public suspicion than it dispels.
Fortunately, gaps are appearing in the smokescreen. Contemporary scientists now regularly appear in the public eye in contexts other than the straightforward scientific interview. For instance, Professor Richard Dawkins presents prizes to winners of a TV quiz, and geneticist Steve Jones advertises cars on television. No doubt these activities have raised eyebrows in laboratories but they have done more to make scientists recognisable as people than any number of academic papers.
The publishing world is also undergoing a transformation. Scientific biographies and autobiographies, if they appeared at all, used to be rather scholarly but dull and over- reverent. The life which the scientist in question led outside work marriage, children, things most people regard as fairly central to their existence - was often dismissed in a couple of paragraphs. That changed with Richard Feynman's Surely You're Joking, Mr Feynman?, the hilarious and affecting memoir of a man who also happened to be one of the century's greatest theoretical physicists.
More recently, even the greatest names in science, such as Isaac Newton, Charles Darwin, Albert Einstein and Marie Curie have been allowed to appear with all their flaws clearly visible. To the reader, it does not matter that Einstein's relationship with his family is 'irrelevant' to his General Theory of Relativity. The question of how creative genius copes with emotional ups and downs, trivial practicalities, the social demands of ordinary life, is absorbing in its own right.
Dorothy Hodgkin was devoted to her scientific work. Her most important successes were solving the structure of penicillin and vitamin B12, which won her the Nobel prize for chemistry in 1964, and of insulin, which her group solved in 1969. In each case she pushed the technique into realms of complexity others deemed unreachable at the time.
But she also had three children to whom she was devoted and was married to a frequently absent husband with a career as a historian. Her personal life is not strictly relevant to her work as a scientist, but surely we can all learn from her capacity to unite the disparate threads of her life into a coherent whole. There is much in her life of universal interest, but it would be disloyal of me to imply that this does not include the science itself. Scientific inquiry was the passion of Hodgkin's life, as it has to be for any successful scientist.
How to communicate the nature of this passion is the hardest task for the scientific biographer. Most readers are not equipped with enough fundamental scientific concepts to grasp more complex ideas without a lot of explanation. Understanding scientific ideas is not really any more difficult than reading Shakespeare or learning a foreign language - it just takes application. It is sad to think that educated people, who would be embarrassed if they fail to recognise the name of some distinguished literary or artistic figure, continue to live in happy ignorance of the rich heritage represented by scientists such as Dorothy Hodgkin.
