Films on video
Film critic Nick James reviews some recent releases
A
Abyss
Long before Titanic, director James Cameron made this sweaty, claustrophobic Cold War thriller about oil riggers and navy experts trying to rescue a nuclear submarine stranded many miles beneath water The banter and self-deprecating bravery of foreman Bud and his men rekindle memories of similarly laconic heroes In movies directed by Howard Hawks. Production design and special effects are hugely impressive. It's only the dialogue and characterisation that creak For all the craftsmanship which goes Into the film-making, the story Itself IS strictly B-movie material.
B
The Thin Red Line
The video release of this version of the James Jones novel about the battle for Guadalcanal directed by Andrew Marton makes a fascinating counterpart to Terrence Malick's new film. Whereas Malick's approach IS mystical and poetic, Marton made a much more conventional war movie. albeit one that is often truer to the book. He concentrated on a single soldier, and on his relationship with his abrasive sergeant. Malick's film IS Infinitely richer and more complex, but Marton's version has ItS moments. The flashback sequence, In which the soldier dreams of the wife he longs for, is handled with a harshness which arguably works better than Malick's soft-focus Imagery of the woman on the swing.
C
On Guard
Loosely based on Paul Feval's 1875 novel, this corny but highly watchable swashbuckler IS a cut above most musketeer adventures It has a consummate villain In Fabrice Luchini's clammy politician, orchestrating death and destruction behind the scenes Vincent Perez makes an exuberant (If rather short-lived) hero, and while Daniel Auteuil is perhaps too moody a presence for a romp like this, he too has his moments as an acrobat-turned-swordsman. The film-makers peddle costume-drama cliches with so much Wit and sparkle It never seems to matter.
D
Character
A handsome but dour tale, set In turn-of-the-century Rotterdam. The excessively detailed production and costume design leave the film looking like a museum piece. Taking his cue from the surroundings, Jan Decleir is endlessly morose as the brutal bailiff Dreverhaven, who behaves ruthlessly when evICting tenants. HIS antagonistic relationship with his son IS at the core of the story, but the film-makers seem too busy laYing on the period detail to do Justice to the dark and vicious parable.
E
The Good, the Bad and the Ugly
This digitally re-mastered video re-release shows off director Leone's craftsmanship to ItS best advantage. The sound editing, in particular, stands out every footstep, creaking floorboard or barking dog registers loud and clear. The storytelling IS relentlessly cruel and whenever there's a lull, It only takes a burst of Morricone's magnificent music to quicken the pulse On a moral level, there Isn't much to distinguish between the good (Clint Eastwood), the bad (Lee van Cleef) and the ugly (Ell Wallach), all of whom seem equally unscrupulous as they maraud across the post- Civil War West.
F
The Longest Day
'Forty-eight International stars' trumpets the publicity for this three-hour Darryl Zanuck war epic. With four directors and 23,000 extras as well, this is one pudding which is definitely over-egged The early sequences, in which the battle-hardened veterans walt for confirmation of when the invasion will happen, drag as much for the audience as for the soldiers. On a logistical level (If not an aesthetic one), this is an impressive enough feat but it cries out for the big screen Panned and scanned on video, It is inevitably a diminished experience.
 