Under Sarah's Spell
Sarah Janson is a trompe-l'oeil artist whose paintings are designed to deceive the eye by creating the illusion of reality. Here she is interviewed by Joanna Watt
There cannot he many artists who l10 not sign their work unless they are asked to. Sarah Janson, a trompe-l'oeil artist, is one. She is not remotely interested in the concept
of the artist as creator, let alone that of the artist as genius: 'It's not the artist
who is important, but the work,' she states. Janson is so self-deprecating that she would almost like you to believe that her trompe-l'oeil works paint themselves.
All of which does not bode well for a magazine interview. 'I just don't like to shout about myself,' she says, and then covers her face in horror when asked if she minds being photographed for the feature, Cut to her sitting room 30 minutes later (a wonderful space in a Hock of artists' studios in London, filled with paintings and drawings) and you find two women bent double with hysteria. Her confidence gained, the interview becomes a fascinating, amusing (and sometimes hilarious) encounter.
Janson has been a trompe-l'oeil artist for sixteen years, after two years' solid drawing at art school ('the best training any artist can ever have'}, a degree in graphic illustration and a stint at a publishing house. But illustration never really satisfied her, and she joined a specialist decorator, Jim Smart ('one of the best in his day'). Smart asked her to do one trompe-l'oeil, and that was it. 'Suddenly my interest got channelled,' she says, She left to set up on her own, 'not really knowing where I was going, hut feeling that I was on the road to somewhere.' Her instinct was right.
Janson's observational skills and fascination with detail (gained through illustrating) proved essential qualities for a trompe-l'oeil artist. 'People often ask me where they can learn trompe-l'oeil. But no one can teach you. Trompe-l'oeil is the school of life. It's all about observation.' She insists (in that self-deprecating way) that she is still learning. 'The moment you think that you've mastered a field you might as well give up.' She is also brutally honest about her 'failings' ('I can't paint bread; it always looks like grey concrete') and is frank about her mathematical abilities. Faced with a huge commission for the domed chapel ceiling at Lulworth Castle, she became totally confused when calculating measurements. 'I thought to myself, "You're not Michelangelo. Who do you
think you are?"' This habit of self-questioning and a reluctance to openly acknowledge her skills has spawned an oddly distanced attitude to her talent. Janson often speaks in the third person: 'When I finished that ceiling, I thought, "Well I didn't do it, she did".'
Of course, her trompe-l'oeil schemes can speak for themselves. Janson's work is in a league of its own, far above those who have jumped on the bandwagon (the art of trompe-l'oeil has experienced something of a revival, hut not with entirely satisfactory results) and she has a string of major corporate and private commissions behind her. Much of her work is inspired by architecture or made for architectural settings. There is the trompe-l'oeil dining room for one client, based on the facade of a Venetian palazzo, and the painting at the end of a corridor in a Hat, which gives the illusion that you can step into two further rooms.
There is always a danger with trompe-l'oeil, though, that once you get the joke, your attention is lost, something of which Janson is acutely aware. 'Trompe-l'oeil has to do two things. First, it must draw you in; it's got to trick you. Secondly, it has to hold you and then engage your imagination. That is the most important part.'
While trompe-l'oeil has to be clever, it must also, Janson believes, be personal to the client. 'I love the interaction with clients; hat is where the ideas arc horn,' she says. 'Without the rapport, the job of creating a trompe-l'oeil scheme becomes rather difficult. Some clients have firm ideas about what they want; others do not. You have to he willing to listen. You have to get inside a client's imagination.' Many have become friends, nut least because Janson practically lives with them if she works on site.
Janson is generous in praise of her clients. 'I am very grateful for the mad ones who have let me loose on their walls.' she confesses. And, they too, seem delighted with her, which is why she is constantly busy - despite her inclination to play down her talent. 'I really don't like to shout about myself,' she repeats at the end. 'Like my work, I am very restrained. I don't want it to shout. You become bored with things that shout.' True, perhaps, hut you could never really become bored with Janson or her work. It certainly deserves to become better known, and I am prepared to incur her wrath while I blow her trumpet.
