In search of true north - and the man behind Halley's comet 
Dr Toby Clark, a researcher at the British Geological Survey, aims to retrace Sir Edmund Halley's quest to chart compass variations. Anjana Ahuja reports.
Astronomer Sir Edmund Halley (1656-1742) is best known for the comet that bears his name. Yet one of his greatest accomplishments, in the eyes of his contemporaries, was to chart, using calculations made on his sea voyages on the warship Paramore, the 'variations of the compass'. These variations are now known as 'declination', that is, the angle between magnetic north and true geographical north. Without it, sailors were unable to correct their compasses. It was therefore impossible to deduce longitude precisely and navigate the oceans.
So it was that Halley, one of only two men in the land at that time paid to conduct scientific research, set sail for the Cape Verde Islands with the grand plan of charting declination in the North and South Atlantic. The trip was quickly aborted because of crew insubordination, but Halley returned to the seas a second time.
This voyage took him and his crew to Rio de Janeiro, down past South Georgia, up again to Newfoundland and back to England. From these travels Halley published, in 170I, a 'New and Correct Chart shewing the Variations of the Compasse in the Western and Southern Oceans'. More sophisticated successors to this primitive cartographic effort proved indispensable to seamen for more than a century, before a slow change in the terrestrial magnetic field rendered them inaccurate.
If all goes well, Halley's accomplishments will be celebrated once again. Dr Clark, himself a keen sailor, plans to commemorate the three-hundredth anniversary of Halley's trip by retracing the route of the Paramore.
PS70,000 will have to be raised before he embarks, and Sir Vivian Fuchs, who led the first cross-Antarctica expedition, is providing support for his efforts to do this. Dr Clark became fascinated by Halley during a two-year posting to Halley Station in Antarctica, where he read biographies of the great scientist. 
'Halley led a remarkable life: Dr Clark says. 'He was not only a respected scientist but also led expeditions. He was not just an astronomer but also did research in geophysics. While he was Astronomer Royal, he mapped the positions of the stars, and also found time for other interests.'
It was during this period that Halley developed a diving bell and also advised Sir Isaac Newton during his writing of Principia Mathematica, the foundation of classical physics. Recreating the voyage, Dr Clark says, will afford Halley the recognition he deserves. The projected expedition, which he has entitled 'In the Wake of the Paramore', will also have scientific merit.
It will involve making the measurements that Halley made, but with far more precise instruments. These measurements need to be updated because the terrestrial magnetic field is slowly but constantly changing.
The data collected should help to refine the existing mathematical model of Earth's magnetic field, called the international geomagnetic reference field. 'It is common to measure the size but not the direction of the magnetic field. That's because you need to know true north to measure the direction,' says Dr Clark.
'On our expedition we can use global positioning satellites to determine that.' The British Geological Survey and the United States Navy have offered to supply instruments. By chance, a Danish satellite will be taking similar measurements over the globe.
Dr Clark hopes that his measurements will plug any gaps in its coverage of the Atlantic Ocean and, he points out, it is also useful to have ground-based measurements as a comparison. It is easy to forget just how significant Halley's Atlantic journey really was. It was the first dedicated scientific expedition on the seas and Halley became the first civilian who was appointed naval captain to pursue what many regarded as an obsession with declination. Does Dr Clark possess the credentials to make his parallel voyage a success?
As well as spending two years in Antarctica and working in the geomagnetic group at the British Geological Survey, he has already sailed the 13,000 kilometres from Rio de Janeiro to England. He envisages that the expedition will be completed in four stages, with four different crews.
And does he share Halley's obsessive trait? 'I am prepared to give up my life for eight months to do this, so I suppose some people might think I'm obsessed. But I wouldn't want to sail across the Atlantic again without a good reason. Halley, and his fascinating life, have given me a real sense of purpose.'
