Beginner Takes All
Even before it was published, The Horse Whisperer was the hottest book of the year. A first novel by British screenwriter Nicholas Evans, it has earned its author record-breaking sums. He talks here about his inspiration and his triumph
The first months of the year were not kind to Nicholas Evans, screenwriter, producer and aspiring director. The year began badly when Life and Limb, a film project he had been working on for months, fell through 'almost overnight'. His disappointment mingled with stomach-churning worry: it had been two years since he had earned any money and the promise of that film had been the only buffer between him and an increasingly irate bank manager.
A wise man, finding himself in Evans' position, would have got a job. He could have gone back to being a television executive, or begun a television project that had been on hold. Instead, he made a decision that most people, Evans included, would consider insane. He bought a ticket to America and set off for three months to research his first novel.
Although he was acting very much on impulse, the seeds for the story had been with him for some time, sown by a farrier he met on Dartmoor while staying with a friend. The farrier had told him the story of a docile horse that had turned, no one knew why, into a fiend. Its owners were desperate until they heard of a gypsy who, simply by talking to the animal, transformed its temperament in a matter of hours. Such men, the farrier said, were known as 'horse whisperers'.
Evans' imagination was captured. He began researching the subject with a view to writing a screenplay - he was, after all, a film-maker. But disillusionment with the film world following the demise of Life and Limb prompted him to write the story as a book. And so throughout the spring he drove across the US, stopping at ranches and learning about horses and the men who work with them.
'It was a funny time,' he says now. 'I was observing people, but essentially [ was alone and I really felt as though my life was falling apart. ['d tried for ten years to make a go of it as a film-maker, and here 1was, hugely in debt and wondering how [ was going to feed the children, and thinking maybe it was all just folly.'
He thought that again towards the end of August, by which time he had returned home and written the first half of the book. 'At that point the bank manager was getting really very heavy with us, and I needed to know whether it was worth going on. I plucked up the courage to show it to a friend who was a literary agent; he read it and said it was "fine".'
When pushed, he ventured that Evans might get $30,000 as an advance on the book. 'I had in mind how much 1 needed to payoff a bit of the overdraft and keep us going, and it was more than that. ['d spent seven months on The Horse Whisperer, and there were at least another two to go. $30,000 was a really difficult figure. I was also advised to write a 12-page synopsis of the remainder of the book.'
In October. together with the first two hundred pages of the novel. this was sent to seven UK publishers on the eve of their departure for the annual spending spree at the internationally renowned Frankfurt Book Fair. Within days his agent was on the telephone to report that he had just turned down the first offer of $75,000. 'I said, "You what?" And he said, "It's OK, I just sense something is happening". '
The events that followed have become publishing history. Within a week - a week of hotly contested auctions - the novel had been sold to Transworld Publications in the UK for 5550,000 and to Delacorte in the US for 53.I5 million, both record-breaking advances for a first novel.
'We couldn't believe it; we sat there with our jaws gaping. W e'd never sent the manuscript to New York, we still don't know how it got there,' Evans says. Nor did they send it to Hollywood, but within that same week the major studios were fighting over it. 'My agent in the UK wisely involved an agent over there and when he phoned us to say, "I think we can get $3 million outright," we laughed in disbelief.'
As they all agreed to this sum, it was decided that they should each 'pitch' to Evans. And so, one night in October, he sat in his study while four great film-makers rang, one after the other, to beg for the privilege of paying 53 million for an unfinished novel. Evans told me all this as we sat drinking coffee on a wooden verandah perched above the leafy garden of his home. He said that he had since turned down an offer to write the screenplay of Tile Horse Whisperer.
'It's all been such a fairy tale so far. I don't want to spoil it. Writing at that level is a very tough business, and I don't want to become an employee of these people who I like and who have paid me so much money. I'd hate to find myself writing a draft or two and then have them say, "Thanks Nick, but now we'll bring in so-and-so". '
He would be involved, he said, but at arm's length. The success of his novel had inevitably brought forth the offer of new backing for Life and Limb, but he was no longer sure that he wanted to make it. 'I think that I would be foolish not to write another novel,' he said.