A history of the apple

Apples have been with us since the dawn of recorded time, in countless varieties of colour, shape and size. But the late twentieth century is in danger of squandering its heritage.

Prehistoric wilding 8,000 BC

Human beings have been munching apples since prehistoric times. They spat out apple-pips in neolithic Britain. And 10,000 years ago they left apple remains to carbonise around their Swiss and Italian lakeside homes. In Switzerland and in the regions adjoining the Caucasus mountains, ancient humans even appear to have dry-stored apple-halves for winter. But these were wild crab apples, tiny wizened fruit which, in Ancient Britain came to be known as 'windings'. They had little in common with the apples we know today.

Norman knowledge 1000 AD

From the Romans the French learned great fruit-growing skills which were developed in the monasteries. This knowledge, which included expel cider-making, was taken to Britain from Roman times, like the dessert apple, Decio - drought to have been introduced by the Roman general, Etio. But most Roman varieties were unsuitable for the British climate and the Norman varieties rapidly took precedence. British monks continued experimenting and developing new apples, and it is from these varieties that Western apples are largely descended.

Mediaeval favourites 1200

Several kinds of apples became established in Britain during the thirteenth century. The Old English Pearmain, recorded in 1204 and so named because of its pear-like shape, was the main dessert apple until well into the eighteenth century. Its cooking panner was the Costard, which was sold in the markets of Oxford from 1296 until the end of the seventeenth century and gave us the word 'costermonger' - meaning someone who sells fruit and vegetables in the street. But prosperity declined as the country was hit by successive droughts, the Black Death and the Wars of the Roses. Fewer apples were produced and more were imported. This went on until the sixteenth century when Henry VIII ordered his chief fruiterer, Richard Harris, to visit France and learn about apple cultivation. Harris returned with a 'great store of grafts' including the famous Pippins, from which he grew the first ever modern-style orchard at Teynham in Kent.

Settler treasure 1750

By the seventeenth century apples were so popular in Britain that the first settlers who sailed to Canada, Australia, die US, South Africa and New Zealand took apples and apple-pips with them, counting these among their most treasured possessions. Captain Bligh of the Bounty took the first apples to Australia; Jan van Riebeeck, the founder of Cape Settlement, took them to South Africa and the Pilgrim Fathers who boarded the Mayflower carried them to America. In North America the most famous apple-planter was john Chapman, or 'Johnny Appleseed'. Born in 1774, he planted seedling nurseries from Pennsylvania in the east through Ohio into Indiana in the west. The Indians regarded him as a medicine man and his apple-tree enthusiasm, odd clothing and religious devotion - he distributed religious tracts tom in pans for widespread circulation - stayed many folktales. He was said, for example, to be so kind to Gods creatures that he even slept with bears.

Modem Delicious 1850 

About this time in Iowa, a Quaker farmer called Jesse Hiatt discovered something sprouting from the roots of a dead tree. The shoot grew into an apple tree bearing a totally new apple which Hiatt named 'Hawkey'. He sent it to a fruit show and on biting into one the judge exclaimed 'Delicious, delicious!'. In 1895 the apple was introduced to the trade as a 'Delicious' and became one of the most widely grown apples in the world.

Granny Smith 1850

Another of the most famous modern apples was discovered in Australia by Maria Anne Smith. The daughter of transported convicts, Maria was fiercely independent, rejecting both the criminal life of her parents and the bureaucratic hypocrisy of the colonial administration. She worked as a midwife in the small township of Eastwood in New South Wales, where she was known as 'Granny-Smith' because she took on responsibility for maintaining the farm and orchard, which was the family's main source of income. One day in 1868 she found a small tree pushing its way through a pile of discarded fruit. She transplanted it and before long was harvesting the world's first major crop of green apples, soon to be famous all over the world. When asked how the tree came about she said, 'Well, it's just like God to make something useful out of what we think is rubbish' - a comment which referred not only to the fruit but also her own convict origins.

Uniformity ales 1950

Apples are now grown all over the world from Himachal Pradesh in northern India to small luxury orchards throughout Africa. Most, though, are grown commercially and come from just half a dozen varieties - usually chosen for their red skin or because they travel well rather than because they taste good. A plague of uniformity is sweeping the world, numbing the tastebuds and reducing the gene pool. While amateur gardeners in the UK have kept many old apple varieties alive, the US has lost forever most of the apples it had 100 years ago.
But consumers are starting to demand more variety. We can't leave the responsibility of saving diversity in our apples - or any other food - up to the random selections of amateur gardeners. We must insist on a world where natural diversity is valued and protected for the benefit of all.