Vancouver

In the last ten years or so, hundreds of thousands of people from all over the world have taken up residence in Vancouver, in western Canada. To relax in the evening, residents stroll down the city streets and, if you join them, you are likely to overhear a different language at almost every other step. People come to Vancouver for its mild climate, its wonderful setting between the ocean and the mountains, its clean and safe environment and its educational and job opportunities. And much as some may grumble about the speed at which new buildings have sprung up, there's no doubt that the new arrivals and flourishing tourism industry have helped fuel an urban renaissance. Locals once referred to Vancouver as 'Terminal City' because of the city's role as a terminus or gateway to all other places. Though the name has fallen slightly out of favour, Vancouver is more a gateway than ever.

Putting Pen to Paper

Journalists like myself are usually poor letter-writers. I have heard it said that this is because of the instinctive distaste we feel at writing something we are not going to be paid for, but I cannot believe we have quite such mercenary characters. It is more probably that since in our work, we are always striving to get the greatest possible effect, the essential spontaneity of a letter escapes us. The real creative artist, who does not consciously work on the effect at all (though he may rewrite a passage dozens of times), does not have this problem. I believe that it is in this inherent grasp of the effect of his words that there lies the only sure test of the real artist. When Shakespeare wrote some of his famous lines he surely never thought consciously that it was the contrast between polysyllables that made them so effective, as well as showing him to be a great writer.

Supermarket Opening

The opening of a new supermarket used to be a bit of an event in Britain. You could always rely on a soap star, a disc jockey or a minor member of the royal family to come down and cut the ribbon. Now it seems that new branches are popping up every day in many areas and so the poor old celebrity has become superfluous. Why pay a famous person when any Tom, Dick or Harry will open it for nothing? Last week, waiting pensioners didn't care who opened the new branch of Superbuy, so long as they were at the front. According to one prospective customer who knew someone who worked there, the first five men over the threshold would be getting a bottle of aftershave, and the first five women, a bunch of flowers. This snippet of information quickly swept through the crowd, instilling feelings of smug superiority among those at the front, and envy from the latecomers.
