Philadelphia Avenue

I headed down Philadelphia Avenue on the odd-numbered side. The dusk had deepened, the humidity thickened into a palpable, prickly drizzle that lent my walk a heightened feeling of sheltered stealth. I knew this side of the street from the dawn of consciousness; our neighbours the Matzes and the Pritchards, and Han Kieffer's grocery store, and the Kring's and the Pottses' houses where my first playmates, all girls, lived. These houses down the street, though not every inhabitant was known by name to me, had each been as distinct to my childish awareness as the little troughs in the cement which led rain from their roof gutters out through the sidewalk to the street, and which punctuated my progress on roller skates or on my scooter. As the street sloped downward, there was a just-perceptible descent in the social scale as well: the porches got lower to the ground, and the front yards became exiguous. Over the years, there had been changes: wooden porch banisters and pillars had been replaced by wrought iron, in a vaguely Southern or Spanish style. Throughout Shillington, not only had houses I remembered as homes become stores but, stranger still, stores - Pep Conrad's up on Franklin and Second, Han Kieffer's here - had reverted to being homes. How had the residents divided up those open, shelved spaces? How did they live with all those ghostly aromas of merchandise?

Bachelor Fads

Furniture designer Rick Gilbert's flat is a former curtain warehouse. It has the conventional features of the classic loft space, in this instance, exposed brickwork and gigantic doors, through which curtains were once hoisted from trains on the adjacent railway track. But Gilbert was adamant that he didn't want a brutally empty, open-plan space - for practical as much as aesthetic reasons.
'In my last place, living and working spaces were integrated. It was hard to switch off or start work in full view of the living area.'
Refusing to conform to the loft-dwelling convention of open-plan living, he broke up the space near the entrance with a giant snaking sheet of corrugated plastic. 'It hides the office, creates a hallway, and guides the eye to the kitchen in the middle of the flat. I wanted the kitchen to be a neutral zone, where I can either cook dinner for friends or make coffee for clients.'
To offset the synthetic look of his plastic screen and stainless steel kitchen, Gilbert laid the floors with a light wood. And while his futuristic chairs and sofas litter the flat, its also stuffed with rather more sentimental and homely furniture, given to him by his parents or bought from markets.

Bruce Chatwin

To escape or to explore? The spur behind Bice Chatwin's absurdly romantic nomadic existence has become something of a literary conundrum. Chatwin's life and art were strewn with secrets, subtle resonances and, it must be said, lies. But he was, for all that, a brilliant and unique writer. His first book, In Patagonia, published in 1977, is an awesome exercise in imagination. A travel book that reinvented travel writing, it has the animation of a thriller, the sparkle of romantic fiction and the irrepressible insight of truly extraordinary literature. Of course, even with this book, Chatwin cloaked fact with concoction; when sketching individuals and incidents, he would adjust, if not abandon, objective reality for the sake of a better twist to an anecdote, or a clean cut to the heart of what the book somehow seemed to suggest - that through travel it was possible to discover whole histories that had been lived out as if solely to excite and fascinate future explorers.

Swimming

The warm rain tumbled from the gutter in one of those midsummer downpours as I hastened across the lawn behind my house and took shelter in the pool. Breaststroking up and down, I nosed along, eyes just at water level. Each raindrop exploded in a momentary, bouncing fountain that turned into a bubble and burst. The best moments were when the storm intensified, drowning birdsong, and a haze rose off the water as though the pool itself were rising to meet the lowering sky.
It was at the height of this drenching in the summer of 1996 that the notion of a long swim through Britain began to form itself. I wanted to follow the rain on its meanderings about our land to rejoin the sea, to break out of the frustration of a lifetime doing lengths, of endlessly turning back on myself like a tiger pacing its cage.
Most of us live in a world where more and more places and things are signposted, labelled, and officially 'interpreted'. There is something about all this that is tuning the reality of things into visual reality. It is the reason why walking, cycling and swimming will always be subversive activities. They allow us to regain a sense of what is old and wild, by getting off the beaten track and breaking free of the official version of things. A swimming journey would give me access to that pan of our world which, like darkness, misty woods or high mountains, still retains most mystery.