Online Literary Criticism For All

Do-it-yourself literary criticism: more than just harmless fun?

From the outset, the idea of open access to the Internet was one of its guiding principles. In theory, anyone could publish a manifesto or broadcast a music channel on the Internet. In practice, however, a certain amount of technical know-how was required, at least in the early years.
However, there was at least one field, previously restricted to the few, that was genuinely opened up to the masses. By visiting the pages of Amazon.com, the first popular online bookshop, anyone was able to try their hand at literary criticism.
Amazon's egalitarian approach to book reviews -- namely, that anyone could say what they liked about anything and award it up to five stars - looked, on the face of it, a brilliant idea. Each book had its own page on Amazon's site, and whenever a reader submitted a new review, it appeared automatically.
This meant that Amazon got to fill its pages with free reviews, and potential buyers of a book could see what other readers thought of it, for better or worse, rather than reading just the blurb from the publisher and the views of professional critics.
Other online bookstores which also operated as large bricks-and-mortar bookshop chains provided similar features. But as the largest player, with over 80% of the online market, Amazon initially had the most customers, attracted by far the greatest number of reviews and, accordingly, encountered the most funny business.
For this critical free-for-all lent itself to subversion of various subtle and not-so-subtle kinds. Thousands of reviews were submitted each day - Amazon would not say exactly how many - so it was impractical to vet them all. Instead, a team of editors scoured the site, checking that reviews conformed to the company's guidelines.
Single-word reviews, for instance, or personal attacks on the author, were not allowed. Nor were reviews that contained obscenities, gave away the ending, or referred to other reviews. Ultimately, however, the reviewers were anonymous (they were not required to give their real names) and offending reviews were removed only if Amazon checkers noticed them. So there was plenty of scope for mischief.
For example, there was nothing to stop writers giving their own books glowing reviews. One writer, Lev Grossman, was so mortified by the bad reviews that readers gave his first novel ('infantile trash', 'puerile pap') that he submitted several anonymous ones of his own ('hilarious', 'fabulous') to redress the balance. His ruse succeeded until he wrote an article detailing his deception. The fake reviews were promptly removed. 
Authors were, in fact, provided with their own way to hold forth: by clicking on a link marked 'I am the Author, and I wish to comment on my book.' Most authors who used this feature posted jolly messages expressing their desire that browsers would buy, and enjoy, the book in question. A few even gave their email addresses, thus inviting readers to communicate directly. Yet authors who posted messages knew that while Amazon did vet them, it did not check that they really came from the author.
An exception to this was made in the case of big names. A little-known writer submitted an authors comment, purporting to be from John Updike, in which he admitted to being a 'talented but ultimately over-hyped middlebrow author'. Unsurprisingly, it was deemed a fake and was removed.
Still, the fur really began to fly as a result of postings from readers, not writers. When James McElroy's We've Got Spirit, which documented a year in the life of a small-town cheerleading team, was published, it was well received by the mainstream press. But many of the people mentioned in it felt betrayed, and the books page on Amazon was an obvious outlet for their anger. Dozens of highly critical reviews were submitted - only to vanish a few days later.
Despite this episode, as far as Amazon was concerned, the fact that so many people were prepared to invest so much time reading and writing reviews was simply good for business. As readers' reviews were supposed to be a 'forum to talk about a book' rather than a chat room, a particularly close eye was kept on bestselling books, to ensure that all reviews played by the rules.
This meant that the best place to post a silly review was on a page devoted to a less well-known book. The Story about Ping, a classic children's work that tells the story of a duck called Ping, was the inspiration for much geek humour, because 'ping' also happened to be the name of a software utility used to measure the degree of congestion on the Internet. One lengthy review constructed an elaborate analogy between the books plot and the architecture of the Internet, and concluded that the book provided a 'good high-level overview' of basic networking concepts.
Such silliness was, however, the exception rather than the rule. The striking thing about the vast majority of reader reviews at Amazon.com was how seriously their contributors took them. And overall the reviews collectively provided a remarkably accurate indication of whether or not a particular set of goods was worth buying.
The writer George Orwell once complained that 'reviewing too many books involved constantly inventing reactions towards books about which one has no spontaneous feelings whatever'. All the more reason, then, to regard the democratisation of the process as a good thing.