Clutter

Sometimes it seems that no matter how many possessions you have, you never feel secure. While it is reasonable to have a basic nesting instinct and create a home which meets your needs, there is a point where the motivation for acquiring things gets out of control. Modern advertising is moreover deliberately designed to play on our insecurities.If you don't have one of these you will be a lesser human being is one of the consistent underlying messages we receive. To discover just how much you are influenced, I challenge you to try not to read any advertising billboards next time you go down the street. These multi-million dollar messages relentlessly condition us in very persuasive ways without our ever realising it. We are bombarded by them - television, radio, newspapers, magazines, posters, tee shirts, the internet, you name it - all encouraging us to buy, buy, buy.

Caves

Research establishments and university departments around the world have invested years of research time in all aspects of caves, mainly their origins, their hydrology and their biology. Caves constitute a small but rather mysterious component of the natural environment - as such they arouse our curiosity and challenge our desire for knowledge, and consequently have had a considerable amount of research effort devoted to them. Furthermore, because of their presence as natural phenomena, they have had a long history of study, which has been intensified in those parts of the world where caves have had a direct effect on our way of life. However, the physical agility required to visit many caves means that cave research has been less in the hands of the learned professors than in most other scientific fields. Indeed there is a considerable, perhaps unique, overlap between the professional, scientific study of caves and the amateur studies carried out by those who mainly visit caves for sport.

Weather Watch

Countless observant people without any instruments other than their own senses originally laid the foundations of meteorology, which has progressed since the 17th century into the highly technical science of today. Satellites and electronic instruments relay endless weather information to us with the minimum of delay, computers solve in minutes abstruse mathematical sums at a speed beyond the capability of the human brain. Meteorological theory is peppered with long words which have little meaning to the non-professional. It sometimes seems there is no room left for simple weather wisdom, but nothing could be further from the truth. Human experience is still the vital ingredient which translates computed data into weather forecasts. Human observations can still provide unusual evidence which is of great help to professionals who are trying to unravel the mysteries of the atmosphere.