Art

In modern times - more and more over the course of the last two hundred years - we have come to speak as though every artist had to rebel against the art of his contemporaries. Art is praised in terms of being unique, revolutionary, shocking even. We feel good about admiring the artist whose work no one appreciated a hundred years ago. But when we get to the art of our own day, we get cold feet and say that an artist has gone too far, that what he does can no longer be called art. Or, rather, the media say it for us. And, on the whole, we agree because we expect to be puzzled by art's insistent newness - so much so that we do not notice the old themes, methods and also virtues that the art of our own time is full of.
We require artists to be separate from the rest of us, figures with special talents and drive, so vigorous that conventions cannot contain them. Previous ages went to artists with commissions: people needed art for specific purposes, and it was part of their ordinary life. Today we leave artists to their own devices and get rather cross with them if they want to come down out of the clouds.

Picture This

I am going to describe a situation, and then ask a crucial question about it. I hope it doesn't strike you as unduly gnomic. But if it does, that's modern art for you.
Here's the situation. An artist chooses a piece of text in an art book. The text considers the diversity of pictures. 'What are they all about?' it asks dumbly, before deciding, even more dumbly: 'There is no end, in fact, to the number of different kinds of pictures.' Okay, this is kiddy-language, and so far all it has betrayed is kiddy-thinking. But stick with me, all you adults out there. The situation is about to complicate itself.
Having settled on his text, the man then asks someone else to make a canvas for him, to stretch it and prime it, and then to take it along to a sign painter. He asks the sign painter to write the chosen text on the canvas. And he gives the sign painter specific instructions not to attempt anything flashy or charming with the lettering. The sign painter does all this. On a white canvas, in simple black letters, he writes the chosen text. So my crucial question is this: is the finished product a painting?

Underground Encounters

At the Mercury Gallery, London until 26th June

It is an unspoken rule of commercial success as a painter that once you have developed a profitable line in one genre, you stick to it. Collectors expect an artist to diligently mine the same seam, and attempts to strike out in a new direction are usually met at best with indignation and the feeling that the artist has let the public down.
Why this should be I'm not entirely sure. Gallery owners obviously prefer safe bets, and perhaps the art-buying public is insecure and needs the comfort of continuity. A few artists break the mould and get away with it. Picasso and Hockney are two prime examples. Eric Rimmington is another artist who is now gamely running contrary to form, and it remains to be seen if he can pull it off. His new show takes the daring step of swapping the pristine still lifes which have made his name for paintings of the world of the London Underground.
Railways hold a peculiar charm for Rimmington. From drawings made in the 1980s of the railway land of Londons Kings Cross Station, it was a logical step to go beneath the ground and look at what was happening below. The sketches have provided the material for Underground Encounters, an exhibition of 40 paintings and drawings which convey the curious magic of this sunken world designed for a population in transit.

Extract from a novel

I have escaped to this island with a few books. I do not know why I use the word 'escape'. The villagers say jokingly that only a sick man would choose such a remote place to rebuild. Well then, I have come here to heal myself, if you like to put it that way.
Apart from the wrinkled old peasant who comes from the village on her mule each day to clean the house, I am quite alone. I am neither happy nor unhappy; I lie suspended like a hair or a feather in the cloudy mixtures of memory. I spoke of the uselessness of art but added nothing truthful about its consolations. The solace of such work as I do with brain and heart lies in this - that only there, in the silences of the painter or the writer can reality be reordered, reworked and made to show its significant side. Our common actions in reality are simply the sackcloth covering which hides the cloth-of-gold - the meaning of the pattern. For us artists there waits the joyous compromise through art with all that wounded or defeated us in daily life; in this way, not to evade destiny, as the ordinary people try to do, but to fulfil it in its true potential - the imagination. Otherwise why should we hurt one another?