Garbage in, garbage out

Charging families for each bag of rubbish they produce seems environmentally sound and economically sensible. It may not be.

Some rituals of modern domestic living vary little throughout the developed world. One such is the municipal refuse collection: at regular intervals, rubbish bags or the contents of rubbish bins disappear into the bowels of a special lorry and are carried away to the local tip.
To economists, this ceremony is peculiar, because in most places it is free. Yes, households pay for the service out of local taxes but the family that fills four bins with rubbish each week pays no more than the elderly couple that fills one.
Yet the cost of rubbish disposal is not zero at all. The more rubbish people throw away, the more rubbish collectors and trucks are needed, and the more the local authorities have to pay in landfill and tipping fees. This looks like the most basic of economic problems: if rubbish disposal is free, people will produce too much rubbish.
The obvious solution is to make households pay the marginal cost of disposing of their waste. That will give them an incentive to throw out less and recycle more (assuming that local governments provide collection points for suitable materials).
But as Don Fullerton and Thomas Kinnaman, two American economists, have found, what appears to be the logical approach to an everyday problem has surprisingly intricate and sometimes disappointing results.
Research focused on several American towns and cities which, in the past few years, have started charging households for generating rubbish. The commonest system is to sell stickers or tags which householders attach to rubbish bags or cans. Only bags with these labels are picked up in the weekly collection. 
In a paper published last year Messrs Fullerton and Kinnaman concentrated on the effects of one such scheme, introduced in July 1992 in Charlottesville, Virginia, a town of about 40,000 people. Residents were charged 80 cents for each tagged bag of rubbish. This may sound like sensible use of market forces. In fact, the authors conclude, the schemes benefits did not cover the cost of printing materials, the commissions to sellers and the wages of the people running the scheme.
True, the number of bags or cans did fall sharply, by 37%. But this was largely thanks to the 'Seattle stomp', a frantic dance first noticed when that distant city introduced rubbish pricing. Rather than buy more tags, people simply crammed more garbage - about 40% more -- into each container by jumping on it if necessary.
As we all know, such compacting is done better by machines at landfill sites than by individuals, however enthusiastically. The weight of rubbish collected (a better indicator of disposal costs than volume) fell by a modest 14% in Charlottesville. In 25 other Virginian cities where no pricing scheme was in place, and which were used as a rough-and-ready control group, it fell by 3.5% in any case.
Less pleasing still, some people resorted to illegal dumping rather than pay to have their rubbish removed. This is hard to measure directly but the authors guess that illegal dumping may account for 30-40% of the reduction in collected rubbish.
The one bright spot in the whole experience seems to have been a 15% increase in the weight of materials recycled, suggesting that people chose to recycle (which is free) rather than pay to have their refuse carted away. But the fee may have little to do with the growth in recycling, as many citizens were already participating in Charlottesville's voluntary scheme.
In a more recent study, Messrs Fullerton and Kinnaman explore the economics of rubbish in more detail. One conclusion from this broader study is that pricing does reduce the weight of rubbish - but not by much. On average, a 10% increase in sticker prices cuts quantity only by 0.3%.
This figure is lower than in other studies covering fewer towns, but is it so surprising? To reduce their output of rubbish by a lot, people would have to buy less of just about everything. A tax of a few cents on the week's garbage seems unlikely to make much difference.
If that's the case, it seems worth considering whether other factors, such as income and education, matter every bit as much as price. In richer towns, for example, people throw out more rubbish than in poorer ones and they have less time for recycling.
Should we conclude that the idea of charging households for the rubbish they produce is daft? Not at all: free disposal after all is surely too cheap. But the effects of seemingly simple policies are often complex. Intricate economic models are often needed to sort them out. And sometimes, the results of this rummaging do not smell sweet.