Air-conditioning

There is a chill in the air at Cannons Gym, a favourite lunch-time haunt for City of London workers. To deal with this summer's unusually high temperatures, the fitness centre has gone overboard with the air-conditioning. So much so, in fact, that at quiet times, the gym feels like somewhere in the Arctic. This is just one example of how the modern world casually misuses air-conditioning. It has become a central feature of work and play, a potent symbol of the ability of humanity to control the climate, or at least modify it.
Many air-conditioned buildings, however, could employ other methods of cooling. They could take advantage of daylight and natural ventilation and have thicker walls that absorb less heat during the day and radiate it away at night. These measures may sound obvious, but they can have telling results and would considerably reduce the need for air-conditioning.

Sundials

It is surely more than coincidence that the beginning of a new millennium is being accompanied by renewed interest in sundials: instruments used to measure time according to the position of the sun. A hundred years ago, they were a vital time-keeping device, essential for anyone who hoped to keep their clocks working accurately. Then, as clocks and watches became more sophisticated and reliable, the sundial was relegated to the status of garden ornament - a romantic and intriguing ornament, but nonetheless an anachronism, in a brave new technological age. Now the clock has been turned back and they are again being taken seriously.
David Harber, a sundial maker, believes that their appeal lies in their direct link with the planets. He says that when he delivers one, there is a moment of magic when it starts working. They are still, calm, romantic objects that remind us of our place in the cosmos.

Paint Your Own China

My image of china-painting stemmed from a visit, long ago, to an arts and crafts exhibition where stern-looking grey-haired ladies demonstrated how to cover a teacup with delicate flowers using a series of deft brushstrokes. The spectacle was riveting, because each stroke formed a perfect petal or leaf. Their hands never wobbled, the paint never smudged, and the observer might have concluded that these women had either been practising their art for decades or had been born with an extraordinary talent for steady precision.
Mindful of this experience, I wondered what kind of people would have the courage to enrol on a course in china-painting. Would even the beginners display an intuitive artistry? In fact, the atmosphere turned out to be far from intimidating. The students were all there to have fun and not even the tutor wanted to paint petals on teacups with the robotic rapidity I had remembered.