Work

Theodore Zeldin looks at how our working life could change.

Are you as respected and appreciated as you deserve? Success in a career is no longer enough. Every profession is complaining that it is not properly valued or understood, and even among individuals who have won eminence, there is often bitterness behind the fame. Loving your work, until recently, was enough to make you a member of an envied minority. But now you have to ask yourself what your job is doing to you as a person, to your mind, character and relationships.
This question is crucial. For however brilliant your skills, if they make you a bore, unable to converse with those outside your speciality, if you are so busy with detail that you have no time to acquire wisdom or exercise your imagination or humour, then no amount of status or financial reward will compensate for your inadequacy as a human being.
To counter this, I am trying to discover how work could have the fulfilment of these aspirations as its first priority - instead of treating us as clay to be moulded to suit industrial purposes - and how it could be reconceived to suit us all, both women and men. It would have to be not just a way of creating wealth, but a worthwhile style of life, a path to a fuller existence, to the discovery of unsuspected talents and to a wider variety of human contacts.
However, this remodelling would not mean abolishing unemployment. This is too simple a goal, because the more people are educated, the more they demand jobs that are life-enhancing, interesting and useful. A lifetime of work has to be seen as a work of art, with the fulfilled individual at its centre.
Even the middle-class professions, however, no longer have the liberating appeal they once had. Doctors are often more stressed than their patients and complain about the failure of clinical medicine. Accountants, despite unprecedented influence, are troubled by doubts about their profession's ethics. Most architects never get the chance to exercise their imaginations freely. Administrators are paralysed by their own bureaucracy. The middle managers, who once gloried in their status, are, as a European study reveals, losing their conviction.
Meanwhile, the business corporations and public institutions in which these people work are slimming. The panaceas of decentralised decision-making, increasing skills and performance-related rewards have not succeeded in winning commitment from employees. In Britain, only 8 per cent of employees 'are strongly of the view that their values and those of their organisations are very similar'.
I have embarked on an investigation of a wide range of occupations, one by one, to see how each shapes and sometimes destroys those in it. I have studied how the notion of what humans are capable of has been expanded in different civilisations, and how courage can be manufactured. I have applied my method to the major preoccupations of our time - happiness, love, friendship and respect.
Having looked at those areas, I am now focusing on the search for more satisfying ways of earning a living. There is no shortage of experts devoting themselves to prolonging the life and increasing the income of corporations and institutions. But auditing our finances is not enough: we need to make an audit of ourselves as human beings too, and discover with what sort of people we want to spend our lives.
How many of us can say that we are fully alive at work? How many of us are really part-time slaves - theoretically having the right to escape from our drudgery, but in reality virtual prisoners of our qualifications and careers, used as instruments by others, working not so that we might become better people, but because we can see no other option?
Take hotel workers as an example, since 10 per cent of the working population is now in the 'hospitality industry'. The amount of unused potential is unbelievable. Many highly intelligent and lively people put up with low prestige, low salaries and long hours.
This is because there has been no serious rethinking of what a hotel is since the days of the Ritz, with its nineteenth-century idea of luxury. A hotel is not just a place where travellers sleep, but a United Nations in miniature. People from all over the world meet at hotels, though they usually pass each other in silence.
A large proportion of hotel staff are foreigners too, keen to learn a new language and discover a new civilisation, but they have the most superficial relations with their guests. Hotels could be cultural centres, active intermediaries between the guest and the city, genuine hosts bringing together people who have not met. Hoteliers could use the knowledge of the many students they employ, instead of giving them only menial tasks.
If they paid closer attention to their staff's deepest ambitions, they would realise that there were many other services that hotels could provide. But they are restrained by the accountants, who say that firms, in order to maximise their profits, should concentrate on one core activity.
The time has come to rethink what this term denotes - from a human, not just a financial angle - and to move on from traditional categorisations. For me, work is a relationship. Now that many people are not content with relations based on obedience, and regard work as an assertion of independence or temperament, they must be given a chance to design their own jobs, and choose their own colleagues, even their customers, within the limits of practicality and profitability.
This means that they have to know how to converse across the boundaries of professional jargon, with minds that may at first seem quite alien. Everybody is clear about the importance of communication, but it is a very different thing from conversation, and traditional conversation is very different from the new kind of conversation which people feel the lack of today.
This is a more intimate encounter, which creates a bond of respect between the participants, and is valued as a way of getting inside another person's skin, with the likelihood that one will be changed by the experience. It is more than a relaxation, because it is the most effective means of establishing equality. Every time you have a conversation which achieves that, the world is changed by a minute amount.