Sand

Much as I admire sands miraculous ability to be transformed into useful objects like glass and concrete, I am not a great fan of it in its natural state. To me it is primarily a hostile barrier that stands between a seaside car park and the water itself. It blows in your face, gets in your sandwiches, and swallows vital objects like car keys and coins. When you are wet it adheres to you like 'stucco', and cannot be shifted, even with a fireman's hose. But, and here's the strange thing, the moment you step onto a beach towel, climb into a car or walk across a recently vacuumed carpet, it pours off you. For days afterwards, you tip mysteriously undiminishing piles of it onto the floor every time you take on your shoes, and spray the vicinity with lots more when you peel off your socks. Sand stays with you for longer than many contagious diseases. No, you can keep sand, as far as I am concerned.

Lock and Key

The search for a safe home, for privacy and security, has existed ever since human beings first built a permanent homestead. The rope-lifted beam behind the door may have given way to an electronic lock triggered by a plastic card with more combinations than there are atoms in the universe, but the urge to shut out the 'bad guys' remains. The appeal of a lock and key is, to some extent, psychological. Recently, various companies have experimented with computerised locking systems, where smart cards, swiped through a 'reader', control electronic locks by means of a digital command. But people don't like them. You may be prepared to put up with it at work, but at home, everyone wants the reassurance of turning a physical key in a lock. As a result, when one locksmith company developed a new electronic system, they made sure they incorporated a proper metal key into the device.

Modern Art

I was nervous about visiting the new Tate Modern gallery as, like many people, I can make head nor tail of modern art. I know I quite like some of it, furry things in particular, neon light sculptures and massive photographs. Perhaps if I were better informed about it, I'd have an opinion on more things. There again, yours not meant to set about it in a school-essay way. The point is not to grasp art, but to let it communicate with you. This is a splendid idea but one that never worked for me in practice. But this new gallery has tried to give the visitor a genuine insight into the whys and wherefores of the works. The first thing I noticed were the labels, proper labels that set a work in context and actually told you what it was trying to say. Instead of staring blankly at the pictures as I used to, these nuggets of information helped me understand.