Metals

It may have been a wish for self-adornment that aroused the interest of Stone Age people in metals. Sitting by the side of a river, waiting for a fish to come within a spears throw, or just idling away a moment, one of our early ancestors might have happened upon a shiny yellow pebble and plucked it off the river bed. It did not have the feel of stone, but it was attractive. In such a way, one could conjecture that gold entered the lives of primitive people.
Given the malleability of the metal, it very soon became a much sought-after material. Copper may also have been discovered by accident, and once the value of copper tools was realised, the search for its ores and for ways of getting the copper out of them was pursued with vigour. Thus, metalworking was added to our ancestors' battery of life-enhancing accomplishments.

St Ives

There was silence as we lugged our bags down the winding, cobbled lane that led to the heart of town, bent double against the force eight gale and trying in vain to avoid the icy waves that smashed over the promenade. There was no one on the streets and the shutters in every cottage on the waterfront were bolted tight against the battering. We had watched the weather worsen as we chugged into St Ives on the tiny single-track railway. As the ominous grey skies closed in, visiting Cornwall in the off-season - without a car - no longer seemed such a good idea. I had lured my friend into joining me with the promise of walks along the beautiful Cornish coast, and snug evenings, toasting ourselves before open fires.

Computer Modelling

The problem with studying the past is that it is past. The people who prospered in times of peace and plenty and struggled through conflict and drought are long dead. The forces that drove them to settle here or move there, that brought them together as families and clans, villages and cities, have faded from memory. Archaeology provides hints and clues, but we cannot test our hypotheses with experiments on cultures living or dead. We cannot rewind the tape and watch a replay of the past. Then again, perhaps we can.
Computer modelling allows us to recreate prehistoric landscapes and environments and populate them with virtual communities - digital creations with some of the needs, independence and capabilities of real-world humans. We can establish rules of conduct and replicate social units. Then we can turn down the rainfall - or turn up the population - and watch how this cyber-culture and its artificial people react.