How to Write Poetry

Telling people how to write poetry is a bit like frolicking through a minefield: spontaneity is the order of the day, but one false step and a dozen certainties will blow up in your face. Setting oneself up as a know-all is dangerous, so I have decided to side-step the whole issue by saying that, for someone just beginning to write, no advice can be a substitute for abundant reading, extensive writing, and the freeing of the imagination and spirit in whatever way seems fruitful, barring total anarchy. Some people need their life to be reasonably secure before a poem will come; others can write their way out of misery. Some write to a timetable: others wait for some moment of crystallisation, a brainwave or slow dawning. All are right, providing they are not echoing some prescriptive score. And it's this finding of a tune which is important, hearing the still small voice inside yourself and feeding it, and watering it, and letting it out for air from time to time; one day it'll be old enough to take care of itself.

The Short Story

In the short story there is no room for overcrowding with too many characters, slabs of lengthy narrative, prolonged reminiscence or retrospection. Flashbacks must be fleeting, and only used if there is no other way to throw light on an issue. One effective way to do this is through a flash of memory in the leading character's mind; the recollection or reminder of an incident or scene, which stirred the current conflict. Such a recollection can get the story on its way or take it a big step forward at a crucial moment, but never at any time must it be allowed to put a brake on the action. In this respect, dialogue is more useful than many aspiring authors realise. Two voices in discussion can reveal two sides of a question in far less time than it takes to explain it from only one person's viewpoint. It also avoids unnecessary wordage and holds or increases a reader's interest. Overwriting can kill a short story from the start, but this doesn't mean that brevity must reduce it to the level of a synopsis. Conflict and action must be as well sustained in a short story as in a novel, but in the short story the art lies in making every word count in a compact space.

Screenplays

Anyone who knows how to play chess will understand how to write a screenplay for a film. Most chess players stumble from beginning to end. We don't know much, but we know enough to play. We move without really knowing what's going to happen further on in the game. Maybe we can see one or two moves ahead, and, if we can, were pleased by our uncanny ability to see even that far ahead. Better than the days when we couldst see ahead at all - when we were playing blindly.
Over time, as we learned more about playing chess, we made a startling revelation: chess depends more upon long-term strategy than upon short-term tactics. Up till then, we'd been happy with a rather short-sighted approach. Suddenly, we became aware of 'the big picture'. We began to see the game as a whole, not just a series of individual moves. And once we saw the game as a whole, we began to see patterns emerge in the play. Gambits, they call them. And the patterns have names, such as openings, middle games and end games. In chess, as in screenplay writing, the more often you play, the more aware you become of its complexities.

Looking at Writing

'Man has an instinctive tendency to speak, as we see in the babble of our young children; while no child has an instinctive tendency to bake, brew, or write'. More than a century ago, Charles Darwin got it right: language is a human instinct, but written language is not. Language is found in all societies, present and past. Although languages change, they do not improve: English is no more complex than the languages of Stone Age tribes; modern English is not an advance of Old English. All healthy children master their language without lessons or corrections. When children are thrown together without a usable language, they invent one of their own. Compare all this with writing.
Writing systems have been invented only infrequently in history. They originated only in a few complex civilisations and they started off code and slowly improved over the millennia. Until recently, most children never learned to read or write; even with today's universal education, many children struggle and fail. A group of children is no more likely to invent an alphabet than it is to invent the internal combustion engine. Children are wired for sound, but print is an optional accessory that must be painstakingly bolted on. We need to understand how the contraption called writing works, how the minds of the children work, how to get the two to mesh.