The Heat is On

We've all heard of global warming, but just how much warmer will the earth get and how will it affect our lives?

Almost everyone has some idea of what global warming is all about, but no one is quite sure about its consequences. A warmer climate is likely to mean changes to the weather in all parts of the world. And since the atmosphere is intimately linked every aspect of the planet on which we live, any changes to climate will have significant knock-on effects for plants and animals, as well as water and soils.
We humans have learned to use such natural resources to our advantage, enabling us to produce food, build great cities and support six billion members of the human race. Any changes to these resources have to be taken seriously. The problem we have is knowing just how the world will change, and what is causing these changes.
There is no doubt, for example, that over the last 100 years or so, human action has significantly increased the atmospheric concentrations of several gases -- which are closely related to global temperature. It seems likely that these increased concentrations, which are set to continue building up in the near future, are already affecting global climate, but our poor knowledge and understanding of the global heat balance make the current and future situations uncertain. What we do know is that atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases have fluctuated in close harmony with global temperatures over the past 40,000 years.
This would indicate that the two are almost certainly related. Evidence gleaned from a range of sources suggests that our planet has warmed at the surface by about 6C over the past century. Most scientists think that this trend is unlikely to be natural in origin and is, in part, a result of human pollution of the atmosphere.
A lot of research has gone into predicting the conditions that will result from higher global temperatures. Most of this research uses computer programs known as general circulation models, or GCMs. They run on powerful computers, use fundamental laws of physics and chemistry to analyse the interaction of temperature, pressure, solar radiation and other climatic factors to predict climatic condition for the past, present or future.
Unfortunately, they are simplifications of the real would and have numerous deficiencies. Their results are only approximate and they are also slow to run and expensive to use. Part of the problem is that we do not understand fully all the processes of the climatic system, although we do realise its complexity.
Despite these research difficulties, most people agree on perhaps the most important aspect of climatic change from the viewpoint of contemporary human societies: the rate of change will be faster than anything we have previously experienced. In this case, the approximate predictions produced by GCMs are being used to gain some insight into the nature and conditions of the world that we will inhabit over the next few generations.
Currently, they suggest that the average annual global surface temperature will increase by between 1C and 3.5C by the year 2100; that the average sea level around the world will rise by 15-95 cm; and that changes in the spatial and temporal patterns of precipitation will occur. Scientists also expect extreme weather conditions, such as heatwaves, floods and droughts, to become more frequent in some places.
These forecasts should leave us in little doubt about the potential impact of climatic change on the natural environment and humans. Changes in climate have the potential to affect the geographical locations of ecological systems, such as forests and grasslands, the mix of species they contain and their ability to provide the various benefits on which societies depend for their continued existence. Thus, the whole range of resources on which we rely is sensitive to changes in climate. This includes food production, water resources and human settlements. The effects, some of which are potentially irreversible, are likely to be unfavourable in many areas.
But this would not be true for all. In fact, some climate change impacts will probably be beneficial. Scientists in some countries have already identified useful environmental trends that are closely linked to the warming that has occurred to date. In Australia, for example, research has shown that the average yield of wheat has increased by about 0.5 tonnes per hectare since 1952, and climate trends have played a significant part in this greater food production.
The most important climatic factor observed in this case was the rise, in recent decades, of the minimum temperature. Among other things, the warmer temperatures have meant fewer frosts, and this has caused less damage to harvests. 
However, many of the predicted effects of future climate warming are far from beneficial. Relatively small changes in climate can influence the availability of water, either due to long-term dying of the climate or by increasing the frequency of droughts. Associated problems are likely to arise first in arid and semi-arid regions and more humid areas where demand or pollution have already created shortages.
The Mediterranean Basin is one example of this and in recent decades decreasing trends in precipitation totals have already been identified in western-central parts of the basin as well as marked changes in seasonality. A clear tendency for rainfall to be concentrated into a shorter period of the year has been noted in the Alentejo region of southern Portugal, with the proportion of annual rainfall falling in autumn and winter, increasing at the expense of spring totals.
A further undesirable effect is likely to be changes to glacial processes. This will impact on glacier ice, ground ice and sea ice, which in turn will affect vegetation, wildlife habitats and human structures and facilities. Indeed, there is a strong possibility that the Arctic's ice cover will melt completely, making marine transport and oil and gas exploration easier but increasing the danger from icebergs.
But probably the most dramatic and visible effect of global warming is the twenty-first or 'greenhouse' century will be the rise in sea levels. This will be caused by the thermal expansion of the ocean -- warmer water occupies a greater volume than cold water -- and the added input from melting ice. With scientists calculating that about half of the world's population live in coastal zones, the consequences of rising sea levels are potentially very severe.
Increased flooding and inundation are the most obvious results, with London, New York and Tokyo being just a few of the candidates for significant disruption. Huge numbers of people stand to lose their homes and livelihoods and this could produce many millions of environmental refugees.
Arguably the most severe consequences would be experienced by several small, low-lying island states, since entire countries could cease to exist if worst-case scenarios are realised. The consequences would be devastating, not only for the people and culture of these islands, but also for the countries that would need to accommodate those who had been displaced.