Maps

The purpose of a map is to express graphically the relations of points and features on the earth's surface to each other. These are determined by distance and direction. In early times distance wha often expressed in units of time, for example 'so many hours' march' or 'a day's journey by river', but such measurements gave more information about the relative ease of crossing the local terrains than they did about actual distance. The other element is direction, but for the ordinary traveller, whose main concern was 'Where do I go from here?' and 'How far away is it?', the accurate representation of direction was not of primary importance. Partly for this reason, written itineraries for a long time rivalled maps. Even today, certain types of maps, for example those showing railway systems, may make little attempt to show true directions. Similarly, conspicuous landmarks along a route were at first indicated by signs, realistic or conventional, and varied in size to indicate their importance. Clearly the conventions employed varied with the purpose of the map, and also from place to place, so that in studying early maps the first essential is to understand the particular convention employed.
The history of cartography is largely that of the increase in the accuracy with which these elements of distance and direction are determined and in the comprehensiveness of the map content. In this development, cartography has called in other sciences to its aid. For example, instead of determining direction by observing the position of a shadow at midday, or of a constellation in the night sky, or even of a steady wind, use was made of terrestrial magnetism through the magnetic compass, and instruments were evolved which enabled horizontal angles to be calculated with great accuracy. 
The application of astronomical concepts, and the extension of the knowledge of the world through 
exploration, encouraged attempts to map the known world. Then astronomers discovered that the earth is not a perfect sphere, but is flattened slightly at the poles, which introduced further refinements into the mapping of large areas. Meanwhile, the demands being made of the map maker were shifting significantly. The traveller or the merchant ceased to be the sole user of maps. The soldier, especially after the introduction of artillery, and the problems of range, field of fire, and dead ground which it raised, demanded an accurate representation of the surface features, in place of the earlier conventional or pictorial delineation, and a solution in any degree satisfactory was not reached until the contour was invented.
Then there was the archaeologist, the historian and, much later, the modern geographer, each with their own special requirements. In order to address these, the present-day cartographer has had to evolve methods of mapping all kinds of 'distributions', from geological strata and climatic regimes to land use. It is the present widespread recognition of the value of the map in the co-ordination and interpretation of phenomena in many sciences that has led to what may truly be called a modern renaissance o cartography.
It would be misleading of me to represent the stages summarily sketched above as being either continuous or consecutive. There have been periods of retrogression or stagnation, broken by others of rapid development, during which outmoded ideas have held their place beside the new. Again, cartographers have constantly realised the theoretical basis for progress, but have had to wait for technical improvement in their instruments before they could apply their new ideas. Since the easiest way to make a map is to copy an old one, and considerable capital has often been locked up in printing places or stock map publishers have often been resistant to new ideas. Consequently, maps must never be accepted uncritically as evidence of contemporary knowledge and technique. 
Clearly, the maps, many thousands in number, which have come down to us today, are the results of much human work and thought. They constitute therefore an invaluable record for the students of man's past. It is above all this aspect that makes the study of historical cartography so fascinating and so instructive.