Surviving in a Foreign Land

I have been welcomed warmly. It's a sociable and well-provisioned base camp in a very, very isolated place. At any one time, there are some forty odd souls - scientists, students, weathermen, satellite trackers -- in a close-knit community where everyone mucks in. My school French is proving adequate - just -- to communicate, but not to chat or banter. I miss the nuances, and my phrasebook is useless at breakfast.
There is no practical problem for me in this, but initially there was a problem of self-confidence. I found myself slightly dreading mealtimes. I would hang back, worried about which table to choose terrified at the silence which fell when I spoke, anxious in a way I cannot remember since the first weeks of school. I still grin inanely, or panic when people talk to me. I suspect the cause of this occasional depression is nothing to do with loss of company or communication, it's because
I've lost the social predominance which my own gift of the gab has always afforded me.

Elliot

When I first met Elliot, I was just a young author like any other and he took no notice of me. He never forgot a face though, and when I ran across him here or there he shook hands with me cordially, but showed no desire to further our acquaintance; and if I saw him at the opera, say, he being with a person of high rank, he was inclined not to catch sight of me. But then I happened to make a somewhat startling success as a playwright, and presently I became aware that Elliot regarded me with a warmer feeling. One day, I received a note from him asking me to lunch and I conceived the notion that he was trying me out. But from then on, since my success had brought me many new friends, I began to see him more frequently.

Alfred Hitchcock

The film director Alfred Hitchcock always insisted that he didn't care about the subject matter of his films, or indeed about the acting, but that he did care about the photography and the soundtrack and all the technical ingredients. For Hitchcock, it wasn't a message that stirred the audience, nor was it a great performance, he believed that people are aroused by pure film, irrespective of their cultural background. Therefore, if a picture is designed correctly, in terms of its emotional impact, the Japanese audience should scream at the same moment as the Indian audience.
Hitchcock's self-appraisal was always precise, rational, deceptively unanswerable, he was a man of reason and a craftsman of genius who liked to hear an audience scream. He didn't deal in speculation, abstraction or intellectual allusion, and his assessment of his own screen characters was not exploratory. He set his sights on film, pure film, and the most dispassionate, mathematically calculable beauty of what a strip of film can be made to do to an audience. 