0ral History

The growing trend for historians to rely on oral evidence is not without its problems. It is naive to suppose that someone's testimony represents a pure distillation of past experience, for in an interview each party is affected by the other. It is the historian who selects the informant and indicates the area of interest; and even if he or she asks no questions and merely listens, the presence of an outsider affects the atmosphere in which the informant recalls the past and talks about it. The end product is conditioned both by the historian's social position vis-a-vis the informant, and by the terms in which he or she has learnt to analyse the past and which may well be communicated to the informant. In other words, historians must accept responsibility for their share in creating new evidence. But the difficulties are far from over when the historian is removed from the scene. For not even the informant is in direct touch with the past. His or her memories may be contaminated by what has been absorbed from other sources (especially the media); they may be overlaid by nostalgia ('times were good then'), or distorted by a sense of grievance about deprivation in childhood, which only took root in later life. To anyone listening, the feelings and attitudes are often what lends conviction to the testimony, yet they may be the emotional residue of later events rather than the period in question.

Animal Science

There are two main approaches to animal science - the physiological and the whole animal. Physiologists are mainly interested in how the body works, that is, in how the nerves, muscles and sense organs are coordinated to produce complex behaviour. Those taking the 'whole animal' approach, although they are often interested in the mechanisms of 'behaviour', study the behaviour of the intact animal and the factors that affect it.
Within the 'whole animal' approach, a distinction is often made between psychologists and ethologists. Psychologists have traditionally worked in laboratories on the learning abilities of a restricted range of species, mainly rats and pigeons. Ethologists have been more concerned with the naturally occurring, unlearnt behaviour of animals, often in their wild habitats. Although this distinction still exists to some extent, there is now a fruitful coming together of the two.
Among these types, it is the physiologists who like to emphasise that their methods are the more fundamental. However, even if we knew how every nerve cell operated in the performance of some pattern of behaviour, this would not remove the need for us to study it at a behavioural level also. Behaviour has its own organisation and its own units mat we must use for its study. Trying to describe the nest-building behaviour of a bird in terms of the actions of individual nerve cells would be like trying to read a page of a book with a high-powered microscope.

The Social Sciences

A problem facing all students who come to study a social science for the first time is that they must do two things simultaneously. They must familiarise themselves with the substance or content of their new subject and, at the same time, they must learn the methodology of the subject. That is, they must become familiar not only with the knowledge and research findings which fill the textbooks but also with the methods by which the knowledge is obtained and organised, that is with the logical basis of the subject itself. The two elements are not separate; they are very closely related. Because we are all familiar with social life through our everyday experiences we may feel that the social sciences are very largely a matter of common-sense. But, as a look at any textbook will quickly indicate, though each of the social sciences is concerned with people in society, each discipline goes beyond common-sense understanding. Each discipline focuses on a particular aspect of social life, each uses particular methods of study and each employs its own set of concepts. It is this set of concepts, the most basic ideas in a subject, which constitutes the 'logical basis of the subject', which enables the social scientist to go beyond everyday common-sense and which distinguishes one discipline from another.

Classical Architecture

To the classical world, that of Ancient Greece and Rome, architecture meant much more than the mere construction of buildings. 'Architecture', says the Roman architect Vitruvius, 'consists of Order, and of Arrangement, and of Proportion and Symmetry and Propriety and Distribution.' For several of these terms he gives a Greek equivalent: his definitions probably derived from an earlier Greek authority whose writings are lost to us. Utility and Function are not part of this definition, though in his book Vitruvius does go on to describe the best form and arrangements for different purposes of structure; but here, at the beginning, the aesthetic emphasis, architecture as an art, has priority. The origins of classical architecture are complex. There was obviously a long prehistory of basic construction, of hut habitations simple in form and material, both in Greece and Italy, which did not match up to Vitruvius' artistic requirements. Though these were, by definition, inartistic they nevertheless contributed an essential element of form, which persisted into the later sophisticated architectural concepts. However orate it may appear from the outside, in essence the classical temple is a simple, single-roomed hut.