'You don't take sugar, do you? shouted his secretary, not so much asking a question as stating a fact - as well she might, because she had been making Lancelot cups of coffee for many months. Her excuse for forgetting such things was that he wasn't normally supposed to be there. Actually nowadays he was usually there all the time, having discovered that to take up his proprietorial privilege of staying away was tantamount to opening the floodgates. Not for the first time he pondered the easy, imperceptibly divided stages by which he had progressed from valued counsellor, meeting authors and playwrights over lunch at carefully planned planning meetings complete with agenda, to hapless dogsbody moving one step ahead of catastrophe, with nowhere to park when he arrived at work in the mornings.
'This came,' she yelled, vaguely waving a manila folder before putting it down in front of him. 'From that chap in Los Angeles. You said you wanted to see it.' A typed label said: 'A World History of the Short, by Ian Cuthbert.' Just under that it said 'An Expanded Synopsis'. Lancelot did not want to see that word 'synopsis'. At the very least he wanted to see a label saying 'A First Draft'. Lancelot had already seen a synopsis of this book and did not really want to see another, however heavily revised. Ian Cuthbert had been given an advance of several thousands of pounds for this book during the initial flurry of activity when Lancelot had bought the firm. One of several old friends from whom Lancelot had made the capital error of commissioning books, Ian Cuthbert was a particularly flagrant proof that in such circumstances the possessor of a wayward temperament, far from nerving himself to behave more predictably for friendship's sake, will actually become less 'pindownable' than ever.
Lancelot skipped the blurb come preamble which he had read for what seemed like the hundredth time and sampled the synopsis proper. There was scarcely a phrase that he did not recognise at a glance. He closed the folder and shifted it to one side. Plainly at this rate Ian's manuscript would never be forthcoming. As well as almost wholly lacking the brilliance for which its author was supposed to be famous, the synopsis, under its doggedly frolicsome tone, had the unmistakable dead ring of a lost conviction. Lancelot remembered tales of a famous author-about-town whose last book, published incomplete after his death, had been coaxed from him chapter by chapter, one payment at a time. But in that case, the payments were fractions of a hypothetical advance which had never been given in the first place. Ian's advance had been enormous; a blatant reversal of the sound business principle by which authors must deliver a manuscript now in order to be paid with inflated currency later.
Lancelot, who had read modern languages at Oxford, could remember the day when Ian Cuthbert had been the most promising talent in a Cambridge so full of promise that it had made everywhere else feel provincial. Ian's contemporaries had plotted to take over the British theatre and in a remarkably short time they had actually done so. But their mental energy had seemed like indolence when you looked at Ian. He had worn his overcoat like a cape and talked about what one very famous French writer had said as if he had been there to overhear it. Yet for some reason, the whole frostily coruscating galaxy of Ian's creative intellect had remained locked in its closet. While less gifted deviants came out and conquered, Ian went further in. At the height of his influence as a literary taste-maker he was already notoriously difficult to deal with. Officially appointed by the relevant public agency to edit a comprehensive magazine of the arts, he was like a general with a million tons of equipment pinned down on the beach by nothing except an excess of opportunity. The magazine used up the budget for a dozen issues without appearing once. Similarly, his thrice-renewed three-year contract with one of the fashion magazines engendered little except legends about the size of his emolument, which was increased from generosity to extravagance in an attempt to make him produce more, and then from extravagance to munificence in an attempt to make him produce anything. At the editorial working breakfasts - there were always at least two of the titled photographers present to capture the scene for posterity - Ian spat witty venom through clenched teeth, and poured nitric acid on other people's ideas. Ten years later, he could scarcely be depended upon to turn up for his own funeral. Lancelot was on the verge of admitting to himself that 'A World History of the Short' had been a mistake from its inception.