Einstein

Stop anyone in the street and ask them to name a scientist, and the chances are they'll think of Albert Einstein. His face is used to advertise products with intellectual connotations, from computers to encyclopaedias.
Most people know little of what Einstein did, except that he developed some mysterious theories under the heading 'relativity', which are famous for being incomprehensible, and for coming up with bizarre predictions that run counter to everyday experience.
Einstein was part of a gigantic leap forward in scientific thinking, an intellectual revolution that heralded the birth of twentieth century science. Physicists and mathematicians were trying to create a new, more rational description of the universe by studying relationships between matter and the forces of nature.
Einstein made his profound and far-reaching contributions simply by looking again at the nature of the fundamentals: time, space, matter and energy. Previous descriptions had depended on Isaac Newton's view of a universe in which stars and planets moved in an absolute framework of space and time. Einstein overthrew this notion, saying that time and space were not absolute but relative.

Young Readers

Throughout our childhoods, Lydia and I distrusted any prize-winning book because we knew it would be worthy; and for 'worthy', read 'boring', we thought.
While our mother had been inclined to abhor our philistinism in tones of despising innuendo, our father would cheerfully dish us out tenpences, chapter by chapter, as inducements to make us cast our eyes over the occasional improving volume. Or he would slip the odd superior book in amongst our Christmas and birthday presents, labelled in bold marker pen, 'This Book is NOT Literature'. Though we dismissed most of his offerings as 'boys' books', he did, in this way, expose us to some shorter works of decent fiction and, just once, to a well-known anthology of verse.

Language

'The origin of human language is truly secret and marvellous', wrote Jacob Grimm in 1851. The marvellous secret has long proved a launch pad for strange ideas. 'Primitive man was likely to make sounds like "meuh" when sensing danger,' claimed Charles Caller in 1928. "Meuh" has a plaintive sound. The human who wandered over a hostile land inhabited by awesome beasts uttered desperate noises, and languages have preserved some echo of his lamentation such as malaria meaning "fever" or the Latin mors meaning "death".
Faced with such weird speculations, many avoided the topic, regarding it as a playground for cranks, but recently, language origin and evolution have become key research areas. Language probably developed in East Africa, around 100,000 years ago. In the main speech was used for friendly interaction, and was an important tool in power struggles. Information-swapping was probably not an important original role - contrary to the views of philosopher John Locke, who spoke of language as a 'great conduit' for conveying knowledge.