I chose this place to live, believing I would find anonymity among those who did not care if the plaster and glass and paintwork of rented houses splintered and decayed, who were not reproached by gardens gone to seed and rotting sofas. In that hope, as in most things, I was proved wrong. People in the shops, who are living their real lives, even if you aren't, soon start to recognise you. Next door's lull-blown roses pouring over the fence are persistent reminders that the gardens were loved once.
Usually, I stay inside trying to forget that there is a summer going on out there, but tonight, I am watching the swifts flying in the transparent space between the treetops and roofs. I have cut back rosemary and lemon balm to make a space for a chair and my arms and hands are tingling with stings and scratches. It is a narrow London garden, where plants must grow tall or sprawling to survive.
'Been doing a spot of clearing, I see.'
It's my upstairs neighbour, Jaz, leaning out of the window, the author of several unpublished manuscripts I am sometimes called upon to dissemble about in my capacity as an English teacher. I have a copy of the latest in my possession now.
'How's the work going, Jaz?'
'For goodness sake. In no other profession is one called on to account for oneself a thousand times a day by every Tom, Dick or Harry.' Her voice tails off, then rallies. 'Tell you what, Ann, I've got something to drink in the fridge. I'll bring it down.'
I don't want Jaz in the garden, and I see now, dully, that it looks mangled and bereft. The only access to this garden is through my flat and Jaz is banging on my door. 'So, you're on holiday now, you jammy so-and-so.' She sprawls, in shorts and vest, on the chair while I drop a cushion onto what had once been a little lawn. 'Cheers,' she says in her delusion of youth, 'I should've gone into teaching - a writer doesn't have holidays. Still, you know what they say, those who can, do, those who can't, teach.'
And there are those who can neither write nor teach.
'So, what plans for the hols?'
All my postponed dread of the school year's ending engulfs me. Empty days. Hot pavements blobbed with melting chewing gum. The walk down to the shops and back. The little park with its fountain, and loneliness sitting beside me on the bench.
'Actually, I'm going down to Stonebridge tomorrow. I've been meaning to ask you if you'd feed the cats.' My heart starts racing as I speak.
'Of course I will,' Jaz says. 'If I'm around,' knowing, as I did, that she would be. 'So where will you stay? Some bijou B and B?'
'No. I'll be staying with my oldest friend, Ruby, at the Rising Sun. We've known each other since we were eight.' It isn't true that I shall stay there, but then I spend my life dealing with fiction of one sort or another.
'Going back to your roots. So what do you think of it so far? My opus?'
My silence on the subject has forced Jaz to enquire about her manuscript, The Cruelty of Red Vans, which lies half-heartedly half-read on my desk.
I like the title and tell her so. I can see how red vans could be cruel, always bringing presents and mall-order goodies to other houses and delivering returned manuscripts in silly bags to hers. Something prompts me to speak honestly for once.
'Let me give you a little tip, dear,' I begin.
'What?' She is affronted.
'Try writing about nice people for a change, pretty people who at least aspire to being good: a touch less solipsism, a bit more fiction...'
'Teachers!' Jaz is a mutinous schoolgirl about to snatch back a poorly marked essay.
'I myself keep a journal, I have for years, in which I write down something good, however small or trivial, about each day.' My words sound as prissy as my old-fashioned print dress.
'Keep a journal! Nice people! Get a life, Ann.'
Oh, I've got a life. I've got my work, and I go out sometimes and fly home again, sitting on the tube with my nose in a book.
When at last we go inside, my calm kitchen gives a moment's reassurance, then out of the blue comes the image of my school geography teacher Miss Tarrantine, who must have been about the age I am now, closing an ancient reptilian eyelid in a monstrous wink as she tells us, 'I've had my moments.' We nearly died.