Paul Simon

Rock and roll in the 1950s was primarily a youth cult, but its lasting importance lay in the seismic impact it had on the middle class and the middle-aged. It also paved the way for the next generation of rock idols, who listened to it awestruck and aware that this strange, unsettling sound would somehow, irrevocably, be linked with their destinies.
For Paul Simon, as for other youngsters in the US, the chief opportunity for hearing this new and invigorating type of music that was sweeping the country was courtesy of Alan Freed's radio show, Moondog Rock'n'Roll Party. Freed's show was required listening for a whole generation of fledgling rock idols. Like the young John Lennon, 3,000 miles away in Liverpool, with his ear glued to Radio Luxembourg - the only European outlet for the new rock and roll - Paul Simon was fascinated by the sounds pouring from Freed's show, and prepared himself for the next big step for a rock and roll obsessed teenager, the switch from listening to others' music to making his own.

Snow

No path was visible, but I thought that I would be all right if I walked with due caution. The wind hammered down from the heights, knocking me over as I slid and slithered on the slippery ice. Suddenly the innocent-looking snow gave way beneath me. I dropped, startled, into a hole some four feet deep. The snow had formed a roof over the gap between two rocks, melting away to leave nothing but a thin crust through which I had plunged. I hauled myself out, shaken and unnerved, wondering what I would have done if the hole had been thirty feet deep. I sat back against the top of a pine tree that protruded from the snow to take stock of the situation. In an hour I had covered about half a mile. It was perfectly clear that I would have to abandon my plan.

Qualitative Research

There are now numerous books which attempt to give guidance to researchers about qualitative research. While much has been written about the collection of data, the books are often silent about the processes and procedures associated with data analysis. Indeed, much mystery surrounds the way researchers analyse their data. Accordingly, we invited a range of social scientists who have engaged in qualitative projects to discuss the approaches that they used. The idea was to share insight and understanding of the process of qualitative data analysis rather than to produce a guidebook for the intending researcher. Such a task involves a process of demystification, of making implicit procedures more explicit. While this may sound straightforward, we have found it far from simple. We have therefore given our contributors the opportunity to present their work in a range of styles, which include autobiographical narratives and more impersonal forms.