Self-help books

Dione Reverend was a mere editor at Random House in New York when she first saw a manuscript by an unknown pop psychologist, Dr John Gray. 'I took one look at the title and knew it would be a number one bestseller,' she says, chuckling, and she was right. The desperately understanding Dr Gray is now a multimillionaire and Diane Reverend has her own company. Dr Gray's slim volume on how to bridge communication gaps between the sexes is the unofficial mascot of a huge and expanding self-help industry that may, as its insiders claim, answer some of American's myriad yearnings for betterment. It also feeds off those yearnings, creates hundreds more and - not incidentally - props up the entire world of New York publishing.
As Britain is learning, the genre can fill entire polls with tomes os quackish and histrionic as their covers - but there are worse. For every self-help title published, thousands are rejected as too derivative or specialised. This is no small mercy. As a new breed of heavyweight editor-cum-ogent goes looking for the next lightweight blockbuster, prose style is the lost thing on anybody's mind. Marketability is everything. 'How promotable is the author? What's the "hook'? Is it universal enough?' Ms Reverend rattles off the key questions, then admits: 'If someone comes to me with a really catchy title, that's two thirds of the battle won. You know you can reach people.'

Autobiographies

There has to be a tacit understanding, a pact, between an autobiographer and reader that the truth is being told. Such at pact is, I would guess, rarely observed to the full. There are many reasons why the writer should lapse. There may be actions or thoughts which he feels it is simply too shameful to make public. There may be things he decides against putting down on paper because (as he rationalises) they are not important enough. There are also more complex and interesting reasons for surreptitiously breaking the pact. The autobiographer may decide that the ultimate goal of the work, the truth about himself, can be served by inventing stories that encapsulate the truth more neatly, more pointedly than strict adherence to the facts ever could. Or he may break the pact by deciding, from the beginning, never to adhere to it. He may call his book an autobiography simply in order to create a positive balance of credulity in the reader's mind that will be extremely convenient for him in his storytelling, and which, in the case of his more naive readers, may not be exhausted even by the time the story ends, so that these readers will go away thinking they have read a true history, when they have read nothing but a fiction. All of which can be done in no particular spirit of cynicism.

Dashiell Hammett's detective stories

Students of the detective story have explained the flourishing of this genre as an expression of the conflicts of late nineteenth and early twentieth century society. The detective story is essentially an allegory. The crime is a symbolic enactment of some innate human impulse of lust or greed, and its solution, at least in the traditional story, represents the reintegration of the personality with society, its lawless impulses quelled so that society can again function smoothly. In Hammett's peculiar version, society is returned to its former state, but that itself is shown to be corrupt and false.
The hunter and the hunted in Hammett's tales are two aspects of the same personality. The private eye and his prey understand each other and are, in a strange way, comfortable with each other. The private eye has a foot in each camp. From the point of view of the criminal he is a bit too straight, and from that of the law a bit too seedy. He is at once a crook and a competitor. The mission of the private eye is sometimes tempered by his sense of complicity, and sometimes his punitive zeal is intensified by his anxiety about this ambiguity.

SCIENCE WRITING

Today's greatest scientific essayist is Stephen Jay Gould. To discuss that art and hear his advice, I met him in an unfamiliar milieu: at the Grand Hotel (where he was staying while promoting his new book). Neither of us, it has to be said, felt much at home. As for writing a piece set in surroundings of such lifeless self-aggrandisement, Gould said: 'I couldn't do it: Trollope might but he knew the culture. And knowing the culture is central to being a successful writer. Science, for example, is a civilisation of its own. As a result, only scientists can make a good job of presenting it. If you don't live in the community and don't understand its rules, you are crippled from the start.'
One of Gould's axioms is: never write down to the reader. 'Make no concessions,' he says. 'You can simplify the language but must never adulterate it. Above all, you cannot simplify the argument. Once readers notice that they are being patronised, your piece is dead.'