Ralph unlocked the door to his let and as he entered the dark, motionless hall experienced that momentary qualm of ownership which even after three years still lightly besieged him sometimes when he returned alone at the end of the day. When he had first bought the flat, he used to come home in an eager, questioning mood - often as early as he could -- wondering what it had been doing during the hours he had been away. It had represented a form of welcome to him, a region in which his focus was undisputed and reliable. He supposed that he should have worried about intruders or burst drains in that moment of reunion, but his flat had always been sitting waiting for him with an expression of independence or of neglect, depending on whether he'd left it tidy or not. In the end he had begun to regard it merely as another cloistered annexe of himself, a space into which the stuffy chambers of his heart and head had gradually overspilled their contents.
He had grown impatient with its inability to be transformed. There was, of course, the small, angular puddle of letters which sometimes gathered by the door and the red eye of the answering machine which could occasionally be found resuscitated and blinking with life when he returned. And he was grateful that the glassy eyes of his windows hadn't been smashed nor the contents ravished with violence, mind you, he wondered what the flat would look like afterwards.
From the dreary distance of his shabby third-floor office on the Holloway Road, Ralph often looked forward to his three or four solitary evenings at home each week. Once he had fled the fabricated world of the office and felt the memory of himself begin patchily to return on his bus journey home, he no longer needed to be on his own, a fact which seemed continually to elude him in his social calculations. Sitting exposed at his desk he would crave isolation, unlimited time alone amongst his possessions, but the relief of escape drained him and he would vainly wait for some sense of selfhood to return. Instead, there was merely a resounding emptiness, which made him suspect during his long hours of loneliness that the alien exercise of doing work which did not suit him had forced him to change, moving him further and further from what he liked to think of as himself. He would often read or listen to music as the night deepened outside, familiar habits which now, however, he would find himself asking for whom or what he did them. His points of reference had grown dim, his signposts muddied: sensations and ideas would arrive and then get lost, circulating around the junctions of his mind, unable to find a connection.
There had been a time, he supposed, when he had not felt this powerless, when, had he but perceived his own worth, he might have escaped; but he had been so eager to fix himself up with something that he had been swept along by this great desire for something, and he had followed the first course which presented itself as if it had been ordained that he should do so.
He had tried, of course, after he left university, to formulate some plan for his own betterment, but it hadn't really surprised him to find, when he searched himself for ambition, merely the desire unobtrusively to survive. He had applied for the types of jobs which had become familiar to him though the talk of his peers, had latched himself wearily on to their futures and jogged behind as they rushed towards them, unable to imagine that he might be put to some use which would manufacture as its by-product his own happiness.
He had attended his only interview gratefully, and in the fever of examination did not think to test the position - an inexplicit editorial role on a free local newspaper for its own merits. Relieved at having pulled off twenty minutes of pleasant conversation with Neil, his boss, he had not considered the future of lengthy encounters by which he was now daily assaulted. Neil had offered him the job there and then, telling him he was the only graduate who had applied; a revelation which at the time Ralph had obscurely taken as a compliment.