Art on TV

Why is it that television so consistently fails when it comes to programmes about the visual arts? Painting and sculpture should be natural subjects for the camera, which has the ability to show a whole work of art, then move in close to examine the details. Yet I can think of few series on television that have managed to convey both the pleasure and complexity of looking at them.
A good example of what goes wrong can be seen in Robert Hughes's eight part survey of American art, American Visions. Hughes is a critic you can trust, he has a personality that commands attention and he has been given nearly eight hours in which to introduce British audiences to a school of art that British galleries have totally ignored. I had expected the series to focus on great works of art. What I got instead was one about the way American history and culture are reflected in its art and architecture.

Dealing in Metals

For 20 years I worked as an international metals dealer and gained something of a reputation as a speculator. Metals are regulated far less than other markets. With a bit of luck, a willingness to take a risk and a good understanding of how the market works, it's possible to make a lot of money. Risk-taking is part and parcel of the industry. The buccaneering culture fits nicely with a free-market global economy. But now the free-trade economists who claimed the market itself would maintain the price of scarce metals have found the opposite is happening. More minerals are being extracted and the cost of raw materials is decreasing. Taking inflation into account, the prices of most metals are about half of what they were 20 years ago. Recently, I was asked to look into allegations made against one of the multinational conglomerates that benefit from these cheap raw materials.

Extract from a Holiday Brochure

Abaco and its off-shore cays are part of the 700 islands of the Bahamas that stretch from Florida past the Tropic of Cancer, to Cuba. Each one has its own personality, each one has something to offer.
The key to getting anywhere in the islands and cays of Abaco is a boat. If you don't get one thrown in with the room don't worry. Be happy. There are ferries galore. And water-taxis. Or, there are plenty of boats to rent if you prefer to go under your own steam.
But sailing is the most popular mode of transport here. Abaco is nicknamed 'The Sailing Capital of the World' for good reason.
Those calm, naturally protected waters are also a paradise for fishing, diving, snorkelling and swimming. The cays and their beaches stretch for 200 miles like a string of pearls. It's not only at sea that gems can be found. At night it's the lights of the restaurants and cafes of Hope Town and Green Turtle Cay that sparkle.