Food

There is something very elemental and satisfying about our relationship with food. I know
I may be preaching to the converted, because presumably people keen on cooking buy cookery books like this one, but so often we imagine that, unless it is some special occasion or an especially elaborate dish, it is hardly worth attempting. Not so. Just by throwing a few roughly chopped carrots, a leek, some celery and a few herbs into water you will get the most delicious soup. This is much more satisfying than buying a packet or opening a tin. Instead of buying an over-sweet chocolate mousse full of preservatives, emulsifiers and additives, in five minutes you can turn out the most delicious confection that both grown-ups and children will love.
Cooking is also an offering, and it is a gesture of care and love to bring once own creation, however humble or simple, to the table. Sharing food is so rich in symbolism, of our deepest human needs, that it is hardly surprising all our festivities and celebrations take place around tables, be they birthdays, anniversaries, engagements or whatever! No one would have a takeaway for a wedding or anniversary party! Nor would many people wish to have a business deal discussed over tinned soup.

In the Elevator

This morning, Alistair had made a stab at straightening up his office, but correspondence still littered every surface. Quarterly tax forms, state and federal, bulged out of desk drawers and cardboard boxes, all waiting on a day when he was in the filing mode. And then there was all the added paperwork that went along with owning an apartment building. The hundred-odd books and a few years' worth of journals were only in proximity to the new bookshelves.
As the elevator bore him closer to his floor, he knew that Mallory would be on time for their appointment. She would be knocking on the door of his empty office on the hour, not a second before or after. She was as compulsive about time as she was about neatness.
How would she react to the mess? She might assume he'd been vandalised. He could walk in behind her and feign shock.
Mrs Wilson, his cleaning woman, had arrived while he was scrambling around on the floor, trying desperately to clear a few square feet of the carpet. Putting his head out of the office door as she was turning her key in the lock of his apartment, he had smiled at her, his eyes filled with hope. Her own eyes had turned hard. Fat chance I'm going in there, said the back of her head as she had disappeared into his residence, which was her territory and all that she might be held accountable for.
He knew Mrs Wilson believed him to be a visitor from somewhere else, perhaps some point straight up, miles out, but nowhere on the surface of her own earth, which was square and shaped by the streets of Brooklyn.

KAREN

It was a simple desire - not to be like her mother - that led Karen to create her own story, her own mythology, a mythology of difference and strength. Tn the tale that she constructed for herself, there were significant moments in her progress; such as the day she was twelve years old and her brother quick-swung a golf club behind him and hit her full in the eye. At the first moment of impact, she was convinced of immediate blindness. But the bone hod protected her, as the doctor from the high-walled house later assured her. The golf club had clean missed the eye and she was left with only a few stitches that healed to a pole drawing of past suffering. When she opened her eyes in the doctor's white-walled consulting room, overlooking the tennis courts, ond saw her mother clear before her, muttering predictably and paradoxically about both miracles and small mercies, she knew that she was saved for some purpose.

Miss Fogerty

Miss Fogerty, returning briskly to her duties across the wet grass of the village green, was both excited and saddened by the scene she had just witnessed. It is always exhilarating to be the first to know something of note, particularly in a small community, and Miss Fogerty's quiet life held little excitement. On the other hand, her grief for Dr Bailey's condition was overwhelming. He has attended her for many years and she remembered with gratitude his concern for her annual bouts of laryngitis which were, fortunately, about the only troubles for which she had to consult him.
His most valuable quality, Miss Fogerty considered, was his making one feel that there was always plenty of time, and that he truly wished to hear about his patients' fears and perplexities. It was this quality, above all others, which had so endeared the good doctor to the village and its environs. He had always been prepared to give -- of his time, of his knowledge, and of his humour. His reward had been outstanding loyalty and affection.