THE WELL

I had read somewhere that from a sufficiently deep hole, one could see the stars, if the day were clear. I had persuaded you to help me with my scheme; you watched, eyes wide, fist to mouth, as I winched up the well bucket, steadied it on the wall and then climbed in. I told you to let me down. I had not thought to allow for the bucket's much increased weight, your lack of strength or inclination to just stand back and let what would happen, happen. You held the handle, taking some of the strain as I pushed the bucket off the side of the well's stone surround. Freed of the wall's support, I plunged immediately. You gave a little shriek and made one attempt to brake the handle, then you let it go. I fell into the well. I cracked my head.
It did not occur to me then that I had succeeded, in a sense, in my plan. What I saw were lights, strange, inchoate and bizarre. It was only later that I connected the visual symptoms of that fall and impact with the stylised stars and planets I was used to seeing drawn in a cartoon panel whenever a comic character suffered a similar whack.
At the time I was at first just dazed, then frightened, then relieved, then finally both angry at you for letting me fall and afraid of what Mother would say. You called down, asking if I was all right. I opened my mouth to shout, and then you called again, a note of rising panic in your voice, and with those words stopped mine in my throat. I lay still, eyelids cracked enough to watch you through the foliage of lashes. You disappeared, calling out for help. I waited a moment, then quickly hauled and pushed my way to the top, then pulled myself over the edge and landed on the courtyard cobbles.
I could hear raised, alarmed voices coming from the castle's main door. I ran the opposite way, down to the passage leading to the moat bridge, and hid in the shadows there.
Mother and Father both appeared along with you and old Arthur; Mother shrieked, flapping her hands. Father shouted and told Arthur to haul on the winch handle. You stood back, looking pale and shocked, watching. I was bowed in the shadows. A fire of fierce elation filled me. Then I saw the line of drops I'd left, from the well to where I now stood. I looked in horror at the spots, dark coins of dirty well water fallen from my soaking clothes on to the dry, grey cobbles. At my feet, in the darkness, the water had formed a little pool.
I looked back into the courtyard, to where Father was now shining a flashlight down into the well and peering into the gloom. The drops I had left shone in the sunlight. I could not believe that nobody had seen them. Mother was screaming hysterically now, a sharp, jarring noise that I had never heard before. It shook my soul, suffused my conscience. What was I to do? I had had my revenge on you, but where did I go from here?
This had quickly become more serious than I'd anticipated, escalating with dizzying rapidity from a great prank born of a brilliant brainwave to something that would not be put to rest without some serious, painful and lasting punishment being inflicted on somebody, almost certainly myself. I cursed myself for not thinking this through. From crafty plan, to downfall, to wheeze, to calamity; all in a few minutes.
The plan came to me like a lifebelt to a drowning man. I gathered all my courage and left my hiding place, coming staggering out and blinking. I cried out faintly, one hand to my brow, then yelled out a little louder when my first cry went unheeded. I stumbled on a little further, then collapsed dramatically on the cobbles.
Sitting up, comforted, my head in my weeping mother's bosom, I went 'Phew' and said 'Oh dear' and smiled bravely and claimed that I had found a secret tunnel from the bottom of the well to the moat, and crawled and swum along it until I got out, climbed up the bridge and tottered, exhausted, through the passageway.
To this day I think I was almost getting away with it until Father appeared squatting in front of me. He had me repeat my story. I did so, hesitating. His eyes narrowed.
Thinking I was plugging a gap, in fact only adding another log to my pyre, I said that the secret passage had fallen in after me; there wouldn't be any point in, say, sending somebody down to look for it. In fact the whole well was dangerous. I'd barely escaped with my life. I looked into my father's eyes and it was like looking into a dark tunnel with no stars at the end.
It was as though he was seeing me for the first time, and as though I was looking down a secret passage through time, to an adult perspective, to the way the world and cocky, lying children's stories would look to me when I was his age.
My words died in my throat. 'Don't be ridiculous, boy,' he said, investing more contempt in those few words than I'd have thought a whole language capable of conveying. He rose smoothly to his feet and walked away.
Arthur looked down at me, his expression regretful and troubled, shaking his head or looking like he wanted to, not because I had had a terrifying adventure and then been unjustly disbelieved by my own father, but because he too could see through my forlorn and hapless lie, and worried for the soul, the character, the future moral standing of any child so shameless - and so incompetent - in its too easily resorted-to lying.
In that pity was a rebuke as severe and wounding as that my father had administered, and in as much that it confirmed that this was the mature judgement of my actions and my father's, not some aberration I might be able to discount or ignore, it affected me even more profoundly.