Goat Racing

I was about to witness goat racing. Easter Monday in Buccoo Village. I was fighting my way through ice-cream vans, hordes of people, food stalls and hot music singeing my eardrums. Even though the general movement was towards the racecourse, I elbowed my way through the crowds in an effort to get a good pitch. An area had been cordoned off to make a course for competitors. Not quite on a par with established racecourses, but on the similar assumption that spectators were to line either side of a stretch of ground along which the participants would travel. An attempt was being made to keep a handful of select goats in order. No mean feat when dealing with an animal fabled to eat almost anything it can get hold of.

Canoe Trip

As the day drew to a close, I started to think about the night ahead, and I shuddered with fear. The canoe was too wet to sleep in, there was nowhere to stop, and we hadn't seen any villages or huts since early morning. In the dim moonlight, and with the aid of our torch we could just make out the line of the cliffs; the torch batteries were failing, so we put in new ones, but they didn't work. Obviously we weren't going to be able to spot a camping place. A couple of miles later, Lesley called out that she had seen a distant flickering light and our hopes soared: the light turned out to be moonlight glinting on waves, soon we could hear the roaring noise of fast-rushing water, though we couldn't see what was happening. Time stood still, and we moved on.

How to be Presentation Perfect - we answer your questions

I am not a natural at making presentations, yet in my role as managing director I am increasingly required to present infernally to my colleagues, not to mention externally to the major shareholders. How can I improve my presentational techniques and my confidence?
You are not the only one. Making a presentation involves completely different skills from those you need to run a company, yet more and more senior executives are expected to be accomplished at it.
If you are trying to convince your audience of something, you have to be convinced yourself. Demonstrate your conviction in the passion and enthusiasm you bring to the presentation. That means you must do your homework. Test your proposition carefully in advance. Ask colleagues to identify the 'hard questions' your audience might put to you. You also need to build a positive climate from the outset. Begin with an area of common ground that people can identify with and build gradually towards the conclusion you want to reach.