Every Picture Tells a Story

Adapting novels for film almost always involves a process of reduction, condensation and deletion. This can be very frustrating for the writer, but also illuminating. Working on a script, I was struck by how much of the dialogue and narrative description in a given scene in the novel I could dispense with, while still getting across the same point. This does not necessarily mean that the dialogue and description of the original were superfluous. It is a matter of the type of attention demanded of the audience by narrative in each medium, and a matter of the type of redundancy each employs. I do not mean 'redundancy' in the usual colloquial sense of material which is unnecessary, but in a technical sense.
In a novel, such redundancy would include the repeated allusion to certain traits by which characters are identified, as well as speech tags such as 'he said'. Strictly speaking a character trait needs to be described only once, but it assists comprehension if we are constantly reminded of it. And usually we can infer who is speaking in a scene of dialogue from the content and layout on the page, but speech tags make reading easier.
Stage drama, which consists mostly of speech, imitates and reproduces the redundancy of real speech with various degrees of stylisation. In some modern dramas, this is taken to an extreme, so that the dialogue seems to consist almost entirely of redundant language, whose function is purely phatic (merely establishing contact between the two speakers), leaving us in the dark as to what is being communicated.

Watching Movies

Watching movies, one can be carried away to the degree that one feels part of the world of the moving picture. It is an experience that lifts one out of oneself into a world where one is not beholden to ordinary reality, at least for the length of the film. So it seems that what one feels and does while at the movies does not really count.
But as soon as the lights are turned on, the spell is abruptly broken, one is again in the ordinary world. One does not feel responsible for the time spent under the spell of the film and, further, this unreality prevents one from devoting much serious attention to what was considered in my boyhood not an art, but 'mere entertainment'. This was how some people of our parents' generation, and most of our teachers, disparaged the movies. Like most people, they liked to be entertained, but they did not consider the movies to be an art.

The film studios

The site of the Leiper Film Company studios was a huddle of many disparate buildings. The topography of the place was irrational and obscure. It possessed, certainly, a few permanent landmarks such as the Script Department, out for the rest it appeared to be made up of numerous small rooms, identically furnished, which were employed for official and unofficial confabulations and could be distinguished one from another only by a surrealist system of digits and letters of the alphabet, and to locate any particular one of these unaided was a considerable enterprise. More than anything else, perhaps, the studio lacked a focus. A decisive single main entrance might have provided this, but in fact there were three main entrances, severely egalitarian in their amenities and with nothing to choose between them except that one of them gave access to the place where you wanted to arrive and the other two did not; and in none of them was there anywhere where enquiries could be made and some species of orientation established. To the mere stranger it was all vastly confusing.
Mere strangers, however, were few and far between; for obvious reasons, the organisation did not encourage their presence. And it was to be presumed that people who worked there could find their way about all right. And by these employees' united labours, romance and adventure would travel the country. Hand in hand, head against shoulder, Jane and George, Sally and Dick would, for three hours at least, snatch immunity, by the studio's contriving, from domestic contention and public strife, from tedium and malice and routine, and the struggle to keep alive.

Film-makers

Almost everybody, it seems, wants to make a movie. Bookshops fill shelves with 'how-to' books about scriptwriting and film production. Fashionable universities offer courses. There are competitions offering the kind of hand-held camera that Robert Rodriguez used to make the film El Mariachi, which cost $7,000 to make and shot him from nowhere into the front line of American independent directors. If ever dreams came true, they did for Rodriguez - and ahead of schedule. Recalling his 23rd birthday in his book about his Mariachi adventures, he writes: "Orson Welles made Citizen Kane when he was 25. Spielberg made Laws at 26. So I've only got two or three years to make my breakthrough film.'
This was not always so. When the studios ruled, film-makers were expected to take time to mature. They worked behind the scenes, as editors, writers or cinematographers. They learnt the job directing low-budget Westerns or supporting short films. John Huston was 35 when he made his first film, The Maltese Falcon. Fred Zinnemann, the director of High Noon, only got into his stride in his forties. But nowadays, without the support system of studios or television, aspiring film-makers are forced to be mavericks.