The Wrong Country

Uncle chose for them a package holiday at a very reasonable price: a flight from Gatwick Airport, twelve nights in Venice, the fairyland city, in the Pensione Concordia. When Keith and Dawne went together to the travel agency to make the booking, the counter clerk explained that the other members of that particular package were a school group from the south coast, all of them learning Italian. But something went wrong.
Either in the travel agency or at the check-in desk, or in some anonymous computer, a small calamity was conceived. Dawne and Keith ended up in a hotel called the Edelweiss, in Room 212, somewhere in Switzerland.
At Gatwick they had handed their tickets to a girl in the yellow-and-red Your-Kind-of-Holiday uniform. She'd addressed them by name, had checked the details on their tickets and said that that was lovely. An hour later it had surprised them to hear elderly people on the plane talking in North of England accents. Keith said there must have been a cancellation, or possibly the Italian class was on a second plane.
They ordered two drinks, and then two more. 'The coach'll take us on,' a stout woman with spectacles announced when they touched down. 'Keep all together now.' There's been no mention of an overnight stop in the brochure, but when the coach drew in at its destination, Keith explained that that was clearly what this was. As they stepped out of the coach it was close on midnight: fatigued and travel-stained, they did not feel like questioning their right to the beds they were offered.
But the next morning, when it became apparent that they were being offered them for the duration of their holiday, they became alarmed.
'We have the lake, and the water birds,' the receptionist smilingly explained. 'And we may take the steamer to Interlaken.'
'An error has been made,' Keith informed the man, keeping the register of his voice even, for it was essential to be calm. He was aware of his wive's agitated breathing close beside him.
'We were meant to be in Venice. In the Pensione Concordia.'
'I do not know the name, sir. This is Switzerland.'
'A coach is to take us on. An official said so on the plane. She was here last night, that woman.'
'Your group is booked twelve nights in the Edelweiss Hotel. To make an alteration now, sir, if you have changed your minds -'
'We haven't changed our minds. Theres been a mistake.'
The receptionist shook his head. He did not know about a mistake.
'The man who made the booking,' Dawne interrupted, 'was bald, with glasses and a moustache.' She gave the name of the travel agency in London.
'Some problem, have we?' a woman said, beaming at Keith. She was the stout woman he had referred to as an official. They'd seen her talking to the yellow-and-red girl at Gatwick. On the plane she'd walked up and down the aisle, smiling at people.
'My name is Franks,' she was saying now. 'I'm married to the man with the bad leg.'
'Are you in charge, Mrs Franks?' Dawne enquired. 'Only we're in the wrong hotel.'
Again she gave the name of the travel agency and described the bald-headed counter clerk, mentioning his spectacles and his moustache. Keith interrupted her. 'It seems we got into the wrong group. We reported to the Your-Kind-of-Holiday girl and left it all to her.'
'We should have known when they weren't from Dover,' Dawne contributed. 'We heard them talking about Darlington.'
Keith made an impatient sound. He wished sh'ed leave the talking to him.
'We noticed you at Gatwick,' Keith said. 'We knew you were in charge of things.'
'And I noticed you. I counted you, although I daresay you didn't see me doing that. Now, let me explain to you. There are many places Your-Kind-of-Holiday sends its clients to, many different holidays at different prices. There are, for instance, villa holidays for the adventurous under-thirty-fives. There are treks to Turkey, and treks for singles to the Himalayas.'
'Now, what I am endeavouring to say to you good people is that all tickets and labels are naturally similar, the yellow with the two red bands.' Mrs Franks suddenly laughed. 'So if you simply followed other people with the yellow-and-red label you might imagine you could end up in a wildlife park! But of course,' she added soothingly, 'that couldn't happen in a million years.'
'We're not meant to be in Switzerland,' Keith doggedly persisted.
'Well, let's just see, shall we?'
Unexpectediy, Mrs Franks turned and went away, leaving them standing. The receptionist was no longer behind the reception desk. The sound of typing could be heard.
'She seems quite kind,' Dawne whispered, 'that woman.' Keith wasn't listening. He tried to go over in his mind every single thing that had occurred: handing the girl the tickets, sitting down to wait, and then the girl leading the way to the plane, and then the pilot's voice welcoming them aboard, and the air hostess with the smooth black hair going round to see that everyone's seat belt was fastened.
'Nice to have some young people along,' an elderly man's voice interrupted Keith's thoughts. 'Nottage the name is.' The old man's wife was with him, both of them looking as if they were in their eighties. They'd slept like logs, she said, best night's sleep they'd had for years, which of course would be due to the lakeside air.
'Thats nice,' Dawne said.
Keith walked out of the reception area and Dawne followed him. On the forecourt of the hotel they didn't say to one another that there was an irony in the catastrophe that had occurred. On their first holiday since their honeymoon they'd landed themselves in a package tour of elderly people when the whole point of the holiday was to escape the needs and demands of the elderly. In his bossy way Uncle had said so himself when they'd tried to persuade him to accompany them.