HE WAS A PEOPLE PERSON

American executives are adopting the polar explorer Ernest Shackleton as a model of good management. Eluned Price reports.

Most people in Britain know who Sir Ernest Shackleton was and have a rough idea of what he did. America, however, has only just discovered him - although the Wall Street Journal's description of Shackleton earlier this year as 'an Antarctic explorer whose beats went all but unnoticed for most of the 20th century' is taking things too far. But now the Americans are making up for lost time with powerful enthusiasm. Biographies and accounts of the voyage of the Endurance are in production and are expected to spring off the shells as fast as they are stacked; the American Museum of Natural History is mounting a grand exhibition, and Columbia Tristar is preparing a film based on Shackleton's life.
Some American managers have also adopted Shackleton as icon and exemplar. His sell-appointed apostles recount the details of his deeds with awe; they extract lessons in leadership and communications as parables for spin doctors, and insiders refer to each other as 'speaking Shackleton'. The determined, resourceful Shackleton, with his reindeer sleeping bag (fur inside) and blubber-stove has become a model for modern management consultants.
Jim MacGregor, the managing partner of Abernathy MacGregor Frank in New York, took Shackleton for a role model years ago. His firm specialises in 'communication aspects of mergers and acquisitions and corporate crises'. Such as? Such as 'this firm's plant blew up' or 'half the workforce has to go'. While not forgetting that Shackleton served time in public relations for a Glasgow steel works, it may be a trifle difficult to spot instantly the relevance of eking out the last bit of albatross in sub-zero temperatures to putting a spin on a derivatives trading disaster for the Internet.
'Even if a company manages its crises beautifully, it can still do a lot of harm by communicating sadly about what it's doing,' says MacGregor. 'Shackleton is a model for management because of his qualities as a leader and communicator. He had his values in order. he was at his best when he and those dependent on him had a great deal to lose -- such as their lives. In some ways the most fascinating decision Shackleton made was to turn back when only 97 miles from the South Pole. That trip explained his credibility for the next one: the lives of his men were paramount.' This refers to Shackleton's expedition to reach the South Pole in 1908 when, 97 miles short of their objective, with unforeseen delays draining their supplies and limited time to get back to their ship, Shackleton made the courageous and difficult decision to turn hack.
In a crisis, says MacGregor, people want to know someone is in charge. Whereas now the tendency is for managers to duck and squirm, Shackleton was prepared to stand up and accept responsibility. His 1914 expedition was the one that became the stuff of legend. His ship, the Endurance, drifted for nine months in the pack ice and was finally crushed by ice floes. When it finally went down, Shackleton told his men, 'we should all eventually reach safety provided that you continue to do your utmost and to trust me'. From all the accounts and diaries the then kept, it is clear that there was never a time that the Boss was not in charge. 'Shackleton thought everything through, planned for every eventuality, kept his men continually informed and sought their opinions,' says MacGregor. 'He was adaptable, willing to let go when something was lost and start afresh. We've built an effective set of principles here that Shackleton illustrates. Clients can relate to his story without feeling thry're being criticised.'
Shackleton believed that an explorer needs optimism, physical endurance and patience. 'One of the hardest things to do in desperate straits is notating, especially in America, a culture that is fanatically opposed to letting time sort things out,' says MacGregor. 'If you buy bonds and guess wrong on the interest rates, you hang in there and eventually you'll get your money back. To "fix it" and sell up would mean a huge loss. Equally, don't be afraid to change your plans if they're not working. If a new product's a stinker, don't keep selling it.'
Shackleton led by example. On the voyage back from the Endurance, he noticed Hurley, the expedition photographer, gloveless. He forced his own on Hurley, saying if he didn't put them on he would throw them overboard. Someone else remembered him doing the same thing with a biscuit when they were near starving on the 1905 expeditions: 'He said he'd leave it in the snow. Millions of pounds couldn't have bought that biscuit.' As Caroline Alexander, author of Endurance, the human account of that expedition, says: 'The public appetite for heroic endeavour is increasing. Shackleton exposes the fact that there is nothing heroic going on now. Everything else falls away and he is left standing, the genuine embodiment of the ideals that we are so wistful for nowadays.'
