Fashion

Fashion is often seen as a modern phenomenon, entirely dependent upon nineteenth- and twentieth-century capitalism for its development. Most historians of fashion are at pains to point out, though, that fashion, at least in the sense of style and design, has a very long history. They often take the rise of the market and mercantile trade in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as their starting point.
As societies have developed in complexity, populations have expanded, and multiple technologies for producing an increasing variety of clothing and physical adornment have been discovered, so the meanings attached to dress have also increased in their complexity and significance. Consequently, it is difficult to say with any degree of certainty today what any item of clothing or adornment actually means. For example, a man's suit, supposedly an indicator of the most extreme uniformity, actually conveys very differing meanings in different contexts and to different people.

Writer

Newspaper reports of publishers in bidding wars over whizz-kid manuscripts have resulted in a skewed idea of what life is like for your average novelist. Down at my end of the business - i.e. not exactly topping the best-seller lists - there are two ways of making ends meet. The wisest among us write in the evenings and have other full-time jobs that will still be there even if the book doesn't immediately get snapped up and turned into a film. Those such as myself, however, are literary odd-jobbers, subsisting on a bit of teaching, the occasional workshop and articles like this. I have heard tell of an in-house writing opportunity offered by a chocolate factory, but I've never managed to get anything like that. Somehow, though, by dint of juggling part-time jobs and credit cards and also, more often than not, thanks to the generosity of those names you find in Acknowledgements, the novel gets written.

Sudden Fame

The small venues we were performing at around the country were all beginning to sell out and extra bouncers were having to be called in to hold back the growing legion of screaming girls. We found ourselves having to use secret entrances to the village halls and ballrooms we were playing to prevent ourselves being mobbed by fans. On the few nights a week when we were not working, we found it difficult to leave the house without being pursued through the streets by adoring followers. In a matter of days, we had been transformed into celebrities. Our moves were monitored by our admirers and all of our needs catered for by our management and other interested parties. Even though the shyness that had always accompanied me never quite went away, it was replaced by a strange naive over-confidence that only naturally shy people who have been thrust into similar situations can relate to. In short, I was emotionally totally out of my depth.