Language

You and I belong to a species with a remarkable ability, we can shape events in each others brains with exquisite precision. Language is so tightly woven into human experience that it is scarcely possible to imagine life without it. Chances are that if you find two or more people together anywhere on earth, they will soon be exchanging words. When there is no one to talk with, people talk to themselves, to their dogs, even to their plants. I like to describe the skill of language as an 'instinct'. This conveys the idea that people know how to talk in more or less the sense that spiders know how to spin webs. Web-spinning was not invented by some unsung spider genius, and does not depend on having had the right education or on having an aptitude for architecture or the construction trades.

Climate and Weather

Climate and weather, which are mainly created by the air around us, profoundly affect the lives and distribution of animals and plants. Climate can be a dominating force on the character of landscapes. For example, warmth and wetness all the year round allow the growth of tropical jungles, which are natural treasure troves, with an incredible diversity of species. Conversely cold, windswept areas can muster only a scattered selection of living things. The daily weather patterns that add up in the long term to the climate are caused by great masses of air rising and mixing, for the atmosphere is never still. Some of the motion is due to the fact that the envelope of gases rests on a spinning globe, because air is thin it is not dragged along at the same speed as the earth, but tends to lag behind. A more important source of turbulence, or air movement, however, is the sun.

Coffee

My duties as bar-person included serving drinks but, more worryingly, I was to be responsible for making coffee. In Lygon Street, Melbourne, a restaurant can stand or fall on its coffee reputation. There followed several days of intensive coffee-making training, in which I took in more than I could ever wish to know about the cleaning and maintenance of the restaurants gleaming espresso machine. I learnt, too, about the essential principles involved in making the perfect cup of rich, frothy cappuccino. By the end of the first week I had to admit that making a decent cup of coffee was not as easy as it looked and I fully expected to be banished to lowly ash-tray wiping duties again. Luckily, my boss was a patient man. 'Making coffee is both an art and a science,' he said, 'and you need time to acquire the knack.'