Kinetic Art

Rejoice -- the well-nigh impossible has happened: London's austere Hayward Gallery has been transformed into a place full of wonder. And not, thankfully, by some huge-budget, mega-hyped, multi-media extravaganza, but by a charmingly idiosyncratic investigation into an almost forgotten aspect of the last 60 years. A new exhibition traces the history of kinetic art -- that is art which is concerned with movement -- in the twentieth century. In the process, it reveals that making artworks which either move by themselves or investigate the idea of movement in some way has been a consistent if largely unrecognised theme of some of the most fascinating creative activity of this century. And not only that -- the marvellous range of paintings and drawings, documents and films on kinetic art assembled by curator Guy Brett, who has made a life-long study of the subject, are presented largely unmediated by text. Visitors, unharried by explanations, are left to have the pleasure of making connections and discoveries for themselves.

David Hockney

Hockney's work appeals to a great many people who might otherwise display little interest in art. It may be that they are attracted to it because it is figurative and, therefore, easily accessible on one level, or because the subject matter of leisure and exorcism provides an escape from the mundanities of everyday life. Perhaps it is not even the art that interests some people, but Hockney's engaging personality and the verbal wit that makes him such good copy for the newspapers. He may, in other words, be popular for the wrong reasons. But does this negate the possibility that his art has a serious sense of purpose?
In the view of some respected critics, Hockney is nothing more than an overrated minor artist. To this one can counter that Hockney might seem minor because it is unacceptable today to be so popular, rather than because his work is lacking in substance. Hockney himself is not self-deluding; he is aware of his limitations and thinks that it is beside the point to dismiss his work because it does not measure up to an abstract concept of greatness. Hockney does not claim to be a great artist and is aware that only posterity can form a final judgement on his stature.

Window-shopping - an art exhibition

In the last few years I have seen loads of exhibitions of contemporary art, and amongst them brilliance and mediocrity. What always bugs me, though, are shows that seem to push an underlying agenda, suggesting there is a common attitude among certain artists. Sometimes it works, we really are made aware of new trends mining though apparently unrelated work. More often, though, we are alerted to a dubious angle or a forced concept. This led me, as a curator, to attempt a show which stands as an antithesis to this.
Together with seven artists I took over a space in an empty warehouse. 'Window-shopping' was intended as a collection of individual artworks that related to each other purely through the fact that they proclaimed to be art. Sam Cole's knitted cats went barmy chasing each other round on a toy train track. In contrast Matthew Crawley's turning on a video camera, opening it up and poking around in there until it breaks flickered, flashed and disappeared on the monitor in the corner. These works certainly didn't fit into the 'an exhibition exploring the theme of ...' category, and wouldn't usually be seen together in the same show, but why not? They did not impede each other and actually, I hope, through their contrast, gave something to each other. OK, so I haven't made any grandiose statements about the nature of contemporary art practice, but there probably aren't any to be made about what is basically an individual activity in which artists set their own parameters.

Art History

People who enjoy paintings are sometimes reluctant to analyse them for fear of spoiling the richness and spontaneity of their experience. It has been suggested that some of the work done by art historians, whose concern is with theory rather than practice, ignores and indeed denies the aesthetic experience, the fundamental pleasure of looking, as well as the very special act of artistic creativity. This view is a bit like the notion that knowing the ingredients of the recipe, recognising the method of cooking and seeing the utensils employed detracts from the taste of the dish.
Acknowledging the importance of enjoying something does not, of course, preclude a thorough knowledge of the object that is arousing pleasure. It might in fact be more pleasurable if we know more about the object we are viewing. Moreover, pleasure is not a simple matter. The arousal of our senses - and how we recognise and register it - is itself open to interrogation. It is also historically located. Why we like particular characteristics of certain sorts of objects at any one time is not simply the result of our genes or our own particular personalities but is determined by values promoted within the society of which we are a part. So, while no one seeks to underestimate the importance of sensuous and instinctive responses to art objects, the notion that the sensuous is undermined by the intellectual is a legacy from a period in the past which promoted art as an alternative to thought.