REMOVAL DAY

With her children now grown, widowed Susan faces leaving the family home.

The van said, Susan noticed, 'Removers of Distinction', and indeed, every distinguishing feature of the house was being removed. Everything which made it particular was being wrapped in newspaper and packed in boxes by Fred the removal man, his enormous fingers like sausages tenderly handling all the breakables, and his team of helpers, not so gentle.
It was a lovely house that she was leaving, an elegant four-storeyed building overlooking a tiny harbour. The years she had spent there, the years of the children growing up and leaving, hung around in the air, faintly present like agitated dust. 
When told that they had bought this house, Robert, then five, had asked thoughtfully, 'Mum, when you buy a house, how d'you get it home?' You could miss a little boy in the physical presence of the adult he had become; Robert was here, helping, and in particular making sure she didn't let on about the piano. Francesca was here too, also helping, in her bossy way, stubbornly certain that nobody but she, the family daughter, would be careful enough over a fine instrument like a Steinway piano.
'She doesn't look like she's going to cry on us,' observed Fred. 'That's something.' 'Do people cry?' Susan asked, intrigued. 'You'd be surprised,' said Fred. 'They go around merry as magpies helping out till its all in the van, then you look round and there they are, crying in the middle of an empty room. They're fine when we get to the new place, mind. It's just seeing everything taken apart that upsets them.'
She could easily imagine.
Left to herself, Susan would have warned the removers about the piano before accepting the estimate. Robert had said sternly that it was their business to see the problem, and their bad luck if they didn't. The piano now stood in solitary glory in the upstairs sitting room, the best room in the house. They would leave it till last, naturally. Sitting on the bottom stair, for all the chairs were gone now, she remembered the time they had arrived.
The day she was living through now was like that day filmed and run backwards - the piano had been carried in first. And it had got stuck on the stairs. For nearly two hours the team of removal men struggled manfully with it, until it seemed they would simply have to give up.
They brought it up to the turn of the stairs, and down again, and cut out banister rails, and got it jammed anyway, while little Robert looked on enthralled, and young Francesca wailed, 'We can't live in a house without a piano! We can't! I'd rather die!' And of course they couldn't, not with a musical daughter destined to be a concert pianist. They had to find a way to get it in, and a way had been found.
Peter, her late husband, had come home to the crisis and had resolved it. The piano had been left in the garden while the other furniture was brought in - there was much less of it then, they had been relatively young and hard up. And next day, to everyone's surprise, a builder had been engaged to take out the first floor window.
Then, from the quay below the house, where fish were unloaded from the inshore boats, a little crane was borrowed, and dragged up the hill by means of the local farmer's tractor. Finally, the piano was wrapped in blankets, hooked to the crane and gently swung safely through the gaping window, while the entranced children danced with joy at the sight of it.
However, the whole process had cost so much it was months before they could afford to have the piano professionally tuned. 'That's that,' Peter had said. 'That's there for ever.' But for ever is a long time.
The children were increasingly too busy to come home at weekends, and Susan was no longer so mobile in the house, and puffing as she climbed the stairs. The thought of the stairs interrupted her daydream. The banister rails were still not quite parallel, they had not been put back perfectly all that time ago. She ought to have warned the removers, surely she ought. But now it was too late. Any moment now they would find it. She looked around, dazed and panic-stricken.
'Are you all right, love?' Fred was saying. 'Mind yourself, it's just the piano to come now, and then we'll be on our way.' She moved from the bottom stair, heart beating. Robert and Francesca had both appeared, standing in the back of the hallway to watch. 'No tears then?' Fred said, conversationally.
Truth to tell she was just on the edge of them. How odd that simply moving things made them matter. Chairs and cups and things, hundreds of things, that one never noticed or gave a moment's thought to while they stayed put, now they were displaced, were full of pathos, crying out to be cared about - and she would have cried, in a moment, surely she would.
Only just then the piano appeared, lurching at the top of the stairs, with Fred backing down in front of it and one of the others behind. It tipped slightly. 'Easy does it!' cried Fred, and they carried smoothly down the stairs and out of the front door, and put it down behind the removal van on the road.
It was Robert who laughed first, but then they couldn't stop laughing, relieved that it was all over. All three of them, helplessly, leaning against each other, gasping for breath and laughing more. 'What's the joke, then?' asked Fred, but he merely started them off again. So that, as they went, the three of them, arm in arm down the path for the last time, the only tears she shed were tears of laughter.