Love them, fear them, worship them, human culture has always had a lot to say about birds.
But what does that say about us? Paul Evans reports

There's a bump, bump, bump coming from the greenhouse as a little brown shuttlecock bounces against the glass. It turns out to be a wren: an ominous bird, a bird of portent, augury and divination. Is it spelling out some sort of message from a world at the very edges of my imagination? Or is it just a poor bird stuck in a greenhouse?
Depending on your point of view, both could be true. Wrens have been flitting through the undergrowth of British culture ever since it began. In medieval times, a complicated system of observing the directions in which wrens flew determined the sort of luck the observer would experience. In modern times, the image of the wren remains in pictures and ceramics in many British households. Even though the early beliefs may have been watered down or even forgotten, the wren still has a perch in our consciousness and a nest in our affections. A wood without wrens is a sad, impoverished place.
This is almost certainly because there is a rich vein of folklore running through our relationships with many birds which reaches back to a time when people read the world around them differently. Where people are, necessarily, hitched more directly to natural processes for their very survival, they develop an ecological and cultural language through which the significance of other creatures is communicated. This significance is, of course, prone to cultural shifts that cause major image changes for the creatures involved. A good example of this is the red kite. During the early sixteenth century, foreign visitors to London were amazed to see red kites swooping down to take bread from the hands of children. These birds were protected and valued urban scavengers. But it was not long before they began to be seen as vermin, and as a result were soon wiped out in most areas apart from Wales. Gradually red kites began to assume a romantic personality linked to this Celtic stronghold and they have now become totemic birds of British conservation, protected again and reintroduced with a view to helping them regain their original distribution.
Our relationship with other creatures is more than cultural and goes way back to the evolution of human nature. Though the first human birdwatchers may have been acutely observant of bird behaviour because it announced approaching predators, bad weather and the availability of food, and also offered a supernatural link to the world of their dreams, there is more to it. When we ask why birds are so important to us, we are also asking what it is to be us. Flight, song, freedom - our fascination, envy and emulation of the avian world is surely a measure of our own identity against that of the wildness of nature. Some might dismiss these feelings as vestigial attachments, useful to us in an earlier phase of our evolution, irrelevant now. But, like the appendix and wisdom teeth, they're still very much part of us and losing them is traumatic.
That is probably why, in recent years, birds have become the barometers of environmental change, indicators of ecological quality: the warning bells of environmentalism. Conservationists in Britain cite the endangering of 30 species, a figure that is depressing not only because it spells out the loss of feathered curiosities, but because it is a massive cultural loss too.These birds carry a huge amount of cultural baggage. For example, the skylark, turtle dove and lapwing signify spiritual love, romantic love and magic. Anyone who has read Shelley's poems, Shakespeare's sonnets and Robert Graves's The White Goddess will feel more than a tug of remorse at the loss of these once commonplace birds.
Yet while the loss of these birds is lamented, the loss of others which don't figure in either literature or folklore is virtually ignored. Folklore is so important. The stories, legends and rhymes which persist through time, with their obscure origins, constant revisions and reinventions, somehow have a greater living bond with their subjects than cold, scientific terms a bond that is strengthened by the everyday language in which they are understood and communicated. This gives them a power to summon up feelings and attitudes from a consciousness buried under all the stuff of modern life.
Whether we watch wildlife films on TV or birdtables in the backyard, what were doing and the excitement we get from what we see cannot adequately be captured by scientific reason. Birds are engaging in ways we still find hard to fathom, let alone articulate, and so the stories we tell about them seem like ways of interpreting what birds are telling us.
The wren in the greenhouse weaves an intricate knot, tying an imaginary thread between the here and now and a deep, distant history, holding the free end in its song and escaping into the future - a riddle that keeps me guessing.
