Citizen Kane

When the film Citizen Kane finally appeared in 1941, despite the brouhaha that attended its release - delayed because of distributor's fears of the harm William Randolph Hearst, its alleged subject, might do to them - and largely ecstatic reviews, it was not a commercial success. It was television that brought it back to the public consciousness. It is perhaps the one film, above all others, that has inspired people to become film-makers. This is all the more astonishing since it was Orson Welles's first film. Welles always maintained that its success arose from his having no idea of what he was or wasn't allowed to do: he just went ahead and did it. But he had an extraordinary team at his disposal, cameraman Gregg Toland, screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, and the special-effects wizard Linwood Dunn. When Welles and Mankiewicz hit on the idea of portraying a newspaper magnate who both was and wasn't Hearst, Welles realised that he had found a perfect vehicle for himself both as director and actor, and seized his chance with the energy of a whirlwind.

Dermot and Carmel

Dermot thought that Carmel was rather odd that morning. Twice he had said that he might be late and not to worry if he dropped into the golf club on the way home. He had to have a natter with someone and that was the best place to have it. Twice she had nodded her head amiably and distantly as if she hadn't really heard or understood. 
'Will you be all right? What are you going to do today?' he had asked.
She had smiled. 'Funny you should ask that. I was just thinking that I hadn't anything to do all day so I was going to stroll down town and look at the shops. I was thinking that it was almost a sinful thing, just idling away the day.'
Dermot had smiled back. 'You're entitled to enjoy yourself. And as I said, if I"m late I won't want anything to eat. So don't go to any trouble.'
'No, that's fine.' she said.

Title Race 

Tea boy? Do you mind, I'm a mobile lukewarm beverage resource facilitator
Human nature provides the most divine of comedies. Witness a recent study which has informed the nation that job titles are a prime cause of envy and unrest at work. A survey by a leading firm of recruitment consultants found that 90% of employers and 70% of employees admit that titles create divisions among colleagues.
Most shockingly, the survey found that 70% of office workers would be willing to forgo a pay rise in favour of a more 'motivational' or 'professional' job title. If our vanity is reaching such proportions that even basic greed is being overwhelmed, we are indeed in dire straits.
The truth is that in these brave new days of the early twenty-first century, nobody is content to be labelled subordinate. The titles under discussion place the emphasis on ability (specialist, coordinator) but are, in fact, little more than euphemisms.