Writing by hand and on screen

Dr Johnson maintained that 'what is written without effort is in general read without pleasure'. The converse is that good writing comes hard. Looking back though my handwritten school essays I was surprised at how few crossings-out they contained. Today I would have rewritten them five times over. I am sure the reason was that they were physically hard to write. The slowness of the hand disciplined the brain. What would be difficult to alter or erase was written with care. The casual facility of the computer leads to sloppiness. Most writers using word processors find the time spent correcting early drafts more or less equates with the time originally spent on handwritten text.
Equally, the e-mail, unlike the handwritten letter, is emotionally ponderous. This electronic Eros is said to have revive the art of the love letter. Millions of these missives now flow down the lines, where previously there was only idle chatter. Hurrah for that. At least these e-mails are written, in a sort of English and a sort of grammar: But words printed on a screen pack a monotonous punch. Their writers are often unaccustomed to the power of the written word and tend, in computer jargon, to 'flare'. Their meaning becomes exaggerated and distorted in transmission. And printed words written in haste lack the care and character of handwriting.

The CD

I put down my cup and went to inspect the CD. The case was disappointing but the rainbow-silver disc inside looked interesting.
'Wonderful little things, aren't they?' Mr Warriston said, coming back into the room. I agreed, gingerly handing the disc to him. 'Amazing they manage to squeeze seventy minutes of music onto them,' he continued, bending to the hi-fi device. He switched it on and all sorts of lights came on. He pressed a button and a little drawer slid out of the machine. He put the disc inside, pressed the button again and the tray glided back in again. 'Of course, some people say they sound sterile, but I think they...'
'Do you have to turn them over, like records?' I asked.
'What? No,' Mr Warriston said, straightening. 'No, you only play one side.'
'Why?' I asked him.
He looked nonplussed, and then thoughtful. 'You know,' he said, 'I've no idea. I don't see why you couldn't make both sides playable and double the capacity...' He stared down at the machine. 'You could have two lasers, or just turn it over by hand... hmm.' He smiled at me. 'Yes, good point.' He nodded over at my wooden chair. 'Anyway. Come on, let's get you sitting in the best place for the stereo effect, eh?'
I smiled, pleased to have thought of a technical question Mr Warriston could not answer.

Books versus Electronic Text

In comparing books and electronic text, the author Malcolm Bradbury was spot on when he said that if matches had been invented after cigarette lighters, we'd have marvelled at the improvement. Most of the propaganda, dazzled by newness, states that electronic text is a change comparable to the invention of printing and that it is already nearly completed. It ignores the fact that shifts in consciousness take generations and such rhetoric falls into the trap of chronocentricity, the egotism that one's own generation sits on the very cusp of history. Take this treasure from Mighty Micro, a book from 1979: 'The 1980s will see the book as we know it, and as our ancestors created and cherished it, begin a slow and steady slide to oblivion.' So far, so wrong. Reading anything lengthy on a screen is such a miserable experience that most never do it and, in any case, the organisation of what resides in computers encourages people to dip into text. Techno-proselytisers have extracted virtue here by claiming that inherent flightiness leads to new forms of narrative and imaginative space. But there's nothing new about 'non-linearity'. Lots of books have never been read from beginning to end - most religious texts, dictionaries and poetry collections spring to mind. What is new is not so much the branchings of electronic text as that computers don't invite the joined-up thinking of reading anything in its entirety.

The Office

Charles Walked through the office door and into a perfect world of order. The carpet was clear of the paper avalanche which had buried it on the very day it was put down, and the naked desk was dark wood, just as he remembered it from the Sotheby's auction of five weeks ago. Neat file-holders were being put in their proper drawers. Twelve years of trade journals now filled the shelves on one wall.
Kathleen strained to close the door of the filing cabinet and then turned on him. 'You have to go to computers, Charles. This is just too much.'
'Hello, Kathleen. Oh, this is amazing.' He was admiring the room, its antique furniture. He was not visualising a computer or any other mechanical device in it, not even a pencil sharpener. 'Simply amazing,' he said, altogether skirting the issue of computers.
Over the two years he had known her, they'd had this conversation many times. She could never understand his resistance to the technology when he was so adept at computers and had even published an important paper on computer-mode giftedness. She had been the inspiration for that paper. Via the keyboard, she could dip her fingers into the stuffing of any software and make it into a new animal that could sit up and bark at the moon if she wished.