The Vienna Assignment

I was in Vienna to take photographs. That was generally the reason I was anywhere then. Photographs were more than my livelihood. They were part of my life. The way light fell on a surface never failed to tug at my imagination. The way one picture, a single snapshot, could capture the essence of a time and place, a city, a human being, was embedded in my consciousness.
One day, one second, I might close the shutter on the perfect photograph. There was always the chance, so long as there was film in my camera. Finish one, load another, and keep looking, with eyes wide open. That was my code. Had been for a long time.
I'd come close once, when some weird aptness in the knotted shape of a smoke plume from a burning oil well made my picture the one newspapers and magazines all over the world suddenly wanted. Brief glory from an even briefer moment. Just luck, really. But they say you make your own - the bad as well as the good.
I went freelance after that, which should have been a clever move and would probably have worked out that way, but for life beyond the lens taking a few wrong turnings. The mid-nineties weren't quite the string of triumphs I'd foreseen when my defining image made it to the cover of Time magazine. That's why I was in Vienna, rather than anywhere even faintly newsworthy.
But, still, I was taking photographs. And I was being paid to do it. It didn't sound bad to me. The assignment was actually a piece of happenstance. I'd done the London shots for a glossy coffee-table picture book: Four Cities in Four Seasons - London, Paris, Rome, Vienna, a European co-publishing venture that netted me a juicy commission to hang round moody locations in my home city in spring, summer, autumn, and winter. I'd given my own particular slant to daffodils in Hyde Park and heat haze and traffic fumes in Piccadilly.
I'd also reconciled myself to the best and truest of what I'd delivered being tossed aside. It was, after all, only a picture book. It wasn't meant to challenge anyone's preconceptions or make them see instead of look.
It was just after an obliging cold snap over Christmas and New Year that I handed in my London-in-winter batch and got the message that the Austrian photographer, Rudi Schussner, had walked out on the job in Vienna for reasons nobody seemed to think I needed to know about. Rather than call in someone new, they offered me the substitute's role.
The Austrian publishers had liked what they'd seen of my stuff, apparently. Besides, I was free, whereas the French and Italian photographers weren't. And I was glad to go. Things at home weren't great. They were a long way short of that. A week snapping snowy Vienna didn't have to be dressed up as a compliment to my artistry for me to go like a shot.
They put me up at the Europa, on Neuer Markt, in the heart of the old city. I'd last been to Vienna for a long weekend with my wife: a midsummer tourist scramble round just about every palace and museum in the joint. It had been hot, hectic and none too memorable. I hadn't even taken many photographs. On my own, in a cold hard January, it was going to be different, though.
I knew that the moment I climbed off the shuttle bus from the airport and let my eyes and brain absorb the pinky-grey dome of light over the snow-sugared roofs of the city. I was going to enjoy myself here. I was going to take some great pictures.
The first day I didn't even try. I rode the trams round the Ringstrasse, getting on and off as I pleased to sample the moods of the place. The weather was set, frozen like the vast baroque remnants of the redundant empire that had laid the city out. I hadn't seen what Schussner had done with spring, summer or autumn. I hadn't wanted to.
This was going to be my Vienna, not his. And it was going to give itself to me. I just had to let it come. A photograph is a moment. But you have to wait for the moment to arrive. So I bided my time and looked and looked until I could see clearly. And then I was ready.
Next morning, I was out at dawn. Snow flurries overnight meant Stephansplatz would be virginally white as well as virtually deserted. I hadn't figured out how to cope with the cathedral in one shot. Its spire stretched like a giraffe's neck into the silver-grey sky, but at ground level it was elephantine, squatting massively in the centre of the city. Probably there was no way to do it. I'd have to settle for something partial. In that weather, at that time, it could still be magical. But then, there's always been something magical about photography.
It certainly seemed that way to the nineteenth-century pioneers, before the chemistry of it was properly understood. Pictures develop and strengthen and hold by an agency of their own. You can stand in a darkened room and watch a blank sheet of paper become a photograph.
And even when you know why it happens you don't lose the sense of its mystery. That stays with you for ever. Perhaps that's why what happened at Stephansplatz that morning failed in some strange way to surprise me.