Amateur Astronomy

Many things have changed in astronomy over the past half-century. Until about 30 years ago, there was a great shortage of charts and catalogues. Telescopic equipment was limited and there were few books on practical astronomy. Today, the range of off-the-shelf telescopes and equipment covers almost everything one could need. Electronic calculators and computers have revolutionised almanacs and chart production, and facilitated the analysis of observations and the publication of results.
All this must surely make this the golden age of amateur astronomy. Well, perhaps, but a great deal has been lost as well. Now one may have to travel 80 km to find a sky comparable to that found in urban areas 50 years ago. The daytime skies are now plagued by aircraft condensation trails which can persist for hours and often spread out to form amorphous clouds, making solar observations impossible and hampering night-time observation too.

Too Much Choice

Society is becoming 'overchoiced'. There are too many things to do, too many options, too many opportunities. In the new economy, the desire for the new product, service or next big thing is an addiction, and technology simply accelerates the pace of change: the noise, the proliferation of new goods and services, offering more and more choice. No sooner has the new product emerged off this virtual production line than the next one is about to be launched. The head spins, the brain races, the fatigue sets in; the disconnection from life begins.
Choice is the mantra of the new economy, but more choice means more stress, less time and more complexity. Hence a new trend is afoot. The search is on for 'simplexity' - the simple things that give meaning in an increasingly complex world. But simplifying your life is not easy in an age of economic excess. There are more basic brands of detergent and breakfast cereals than we can ever need or want, more software upgrades, features and calling plans than we can keep track of.

McAndrews Hotel

Every summer we spend a fortnight in McAndrews Hotel in North Mayo, Ireland. It is a family tradition, instigated by my grandmother, and by now it has achieved a certain sacredness. Nothing is allowed to interfere with the ritual. We are of a kind, McAndrews clientele: old-fashioned, odd perhaps, some would say snobbish. I do not like the bad manners, the insolence of shop assistants which passes for egalitarianism in this present age; I resent chummy overtures from waiters who sometimes appear to restrain themselves with difficulty from slapping one on the back. I know most of my fellow-guests' names - like me they have been coming here since they were children - yet can rest assured that when I meet any of them in any part of the hotel, I shall be spared all social intercourse apart from a civil word of greeting. Such respect for dignity and personal privacy is hard to come by in commercial establishments these days.