The Actor's Craft

Derision and contempt are sprayed at actors from time to time. Much of this disdain is fuelled by the actors themselves when they're compelled by their film/theatre companies to talk about their craft (and themselves) in interviews. They should give the dancer Pavlova's reply to the man who asked her what she meant when she was dancing: 'If I could tell you,' she said, 'I wouldn't dance it.' But instead they all too easily fall into ponderous cliches, silly truisms or into the prurient jaws of the gossip machine. We should all pay heed to what Paul Scofield said in a letter to a friend of mine: 'I have found that an actor's work has life and interest only in its execution. It seems to wither away in discussion and become emptily theoretical and insubstantial. It has no rules (except perhaps audibility). With every play and every playwright the actor starts from scratch, as if he or she knows nothing and proceeds to learn afresh every time growing with the relationships of the characters and the insights of the writer. When the play has finished its run, he's empty until the next time. And its the emptiness which is, I find, apparent in any discussion of theatre work.'

A review of Hamlet

Adrian Lester's Hamlet is poised precariously between boyhood and manhood, and it is a performance of thrilling simplicity and assurance. His handling of the text and his physical and psychological self-control take him, in one leap, from brilliantly promising to frontline player: an actor with the intelligent confidence to be almost self-effacing. Lester plays an edgy, tetchy young man who feeds on a banked-down sense of anger, agile, watchful and driven, he deploys a sense of acid wit and generous humour that makes him both formidable and lovable. Although played down, the virtuosity of this performance is unmistakable. Observe Lester's body, the way his arms hang stiffly, giving you a sense of a figure waiting to be animated. Handy's portrayal of Horatio gives you a similar feeling of a body being moved by an inner force that he both knows and does not know. So what is acting? What is behaviour? Is the former an imitation or an evocation of the latter? Who and what animates these bodies, morally and physically? That is the central question about the life of the theatre.

One director's approach to rehearsal

The first stage of this director's rehearsal process is known as 'dropping in', a procedure which goes something like this. The stage manager projects the script onto a screen. The actors sit quietly while someone else is speaking, finding out what effect the words are having. When if is their turn to speak, they glance of the screen, digest the first phrase, think about what it means to them, wait to find the impulse - the reason to speak - then speak. For example, the line is, 'Queuing all night, the rain, do you remember?; Breathe. Let the thought drop in with your breath. A memory, a vision, an impression. Some people will imagine a queue, maybe at a bus stop on the way to rehearsals or for a rock concert in their youth. Having visualised the scene, find the impulse to speak it - what this director calls 'The pathway to the line'. Impulses can come from without or within. Look in the eyes of the other actor listening. Consider your character's situation. This director talks of 'dropping in' as a means of finding out what is going on. Don't pre-plan or pre-judge. Dare to go down there with an empty mind and trust that something will happen to you.

The Perfect Theatre

The perfect theatre should make you feel as if your presence has made a difference. Going to the theatre, going to any live performance, is an event and the staff need to have a sense of that, too. It's terribly alienating if you feel that its just any old job for the people working front of house.
The theatre itself needs to create a relationship between the performer and the audience - no one in the audience should feel that they're getting an unreasonably prejudiced view of the actor. It's important that they're not too far away, they can hear, they can see, they can feel in some sense in contact with what's going on on stage. The proportions of an auditorium are important. They have to respond to the human voice and the scale of the human body. If an auditorium dwarfs the human body, there's something wrong with it because you can't deny the human form at the heart of drama. A lot of theatres in the late nineteenth century got it right because they managed to shape an auditorium that somehow embraces the stage.
I like theatres that have a sense of the past in them. Like worn stone steps in a church, you get the sense of layers of human presence. From the point of view of the plays, you can't have something for everybody. You cant second-guess an audience because they don't know what they're going to want to see. When you visit the theatre, you want something done in a way you can't imagine, otherwise you may as well have stayed at home.