Joanna's Lessons

Joanna MacGregor has a hectic schedule as a concert pianist. So why has she added the task of writing books for young children learning the piano?

Even a member of that mythical species, the completely tone deaf, could not fail to be stirred by a Joanna MacGregor performance. Simply to see her zipping around a keyboard grabbing fistfuls of notes at the behest of some unfeasible contemporary score is to watch a pianist pushing the human frame to its limits.
But even her dazzling virtuosity was not enough to was one small boy at a recent concert she gave for kids. Like the rest of the audience, he had been cascaded with bits and bobs of pieces in every style from her vast repertoire of classical, jazz, ragtime, blues, techno, African, etc. He'd coolly watched her dive under the lid of the concert grand to pluck the wires - normally a surefire knockout for kids. Then as she drew breath and invited questions, he piped up: 'Can you play Match of the Day?'
How many veterans of the concert hall platform would be floored by such a request? For Joanna MacGregor, though, it was simply a hoot. 'In his eyes, until I played that, I hadn't passed the test. I wasn't a proper pianist.' Needless to say, she sailed through and doubtless logged the experience for her next children's recital.
MacGregor is rare among top-flight concert pianists for the interest she takes in how young children learn the instrument. She has just published her own elementary piano tutor for children: Joanna MacGregor's Piano World. And she has managed it despite a crippling work schedule.
There hardly seems to be a festival this summer she is not gracing. Tomorrow she is in the thick of an all-day collaboration between nine young composers and artists. She runs her own recording label, Sound Circus. And by her own admission, she cannot meet an artist of any sort without being tempted to suggest a joint project. So why on earth take on the extra burden of writing a book?
'People who know me are clearly surprised. But I think the very first lessons are absolutely crucial. It says a lot about the music profession that we tend to concentrate on the top end, on this idea of the child as nascent virtuoso. Most people's interest in music is much more ordinary and everyday. I find that far more interesting!'
In producing the first three books, MacGregor is drawing on vivid experience. Between the ages of 18 and 25, before she was getting concert engagements as a pianist, she taught a stream of beginners the piano. But most important in her make-up now as a musician who is unsurpassed in the breadth of her eclectic repertoire was the endless procession of small boys and girls traipsing into her childhood home, where her mother taught the piano.
'Not only was I fiddling around at the keyboard, but there were all these other children of all backgrounds wanting to play every sort of music - bits of classical, jazz, pop, improvisation. I wasn't part of that hothouse thing of forcing exceptional talent. I grew up with the idea of trying to make music available to people of all abilities.'
Just as everyone should be able to learn how to swim or to speak a smattering of French, so, in her view, should everybody be able to make a stab at learning the piano. Some kids have a flair and make rapid progress. She is fascinated by the others: those who chug along at varying rates of progress, enjoying it for a while, but all too often giving up. This falling off happens at any stage. Some kids find the beginning too frustrating. Others rebel further down the line when the stakes get higher and parental pressure is driving them 'to be like those children on the telly.'
'I worry that some people use music, like sport, as a way of making their children achieve things, rather than just saying: it's music, it's there to enjoy. The reason children fall by the wayside is because they feel they are not going to match up to their parents' expectations.
The production of her own training manual begs an obvious question. Does she have a poor opinion of the existing corpus of tutor books, or indeed of the general quality of piano teaching? 'I'm very reluctant to criticise other people's teaching or others' tutor books,' she says. What she does do is readily accept that her books, colourful and eye-catching though they are, are by no means the only books on the market designed to make the first steps enjoyable.
Her own special wheeze for luring these neophytes, the fives, sixes and sevens, through those bewildering times is to weave a storyline into the books and their accompanying CDs. The challenge at this fragile stage is to make the work interesting. And so, from lesson one, there are accompaniments in a variety of styles for teacher - or parent - to play beneath a child's line. For kids whose parents aren't pianists the accompaniments are recorded on the CDs. Learning should be unadulterated fun, MacGregor insists.
'You have to allow them to improvise and give them a reason to play at either end of the keyboard and on the black notes and use the pedals.' As progress is made, bigger obstacles loom. Children need to be coaxed quite hard to read the music rather than rely on ear. Having relied for so much of her own childhood on her very keen ear, MacGregor has considerable sympathy on this score.
But she believes the single most important factor is practice. How can children be persuaded to play a passage even once again, let alone many times over? She admits to not having practised rigorously until she went to the Royal Academy of Music, where she began building up a contemporary repertoire whose formidable difficulties demanded practice. Now she loves it. The eight hours a day that she gets through are the core of her musical life, she says, more important than performances.
'I have enormous sympathy with people who find it difficult. I don't think people talk about it enough.' The secret, whether you do it for twenty minutes or five hours, is to work out beforehand what it is you are aiming to do, she says. Other tips: treat yourself - play the whole piece through, however many wrong notes. And mix hard with easy.