Photography

When a photographer takes a photograph, he or she makes a selection of visual information that is determined by his or her technical and aesthetic skills, personal views and experience, together with a set of social and cultural norms. And in the course of this book we shall see how these factors not only affect the style, content and expression of a photograph, but also how those images are perceived and responded to by the viewer. For example, we might consider that the casual reader of a newspaper will have an implicit understanding of the photographic images reproduced on the page. But rather than accepting the photograph at face value, we might question whether it accurately recorded the scene as it would have looked at the time. Or, in contrast, does it communicate the photographer's point of view? Is it the precise instant recorded that is of particular importance, or should the photograph on the page be understood as a symbol to represent a state of affairs in the world?

More than a game

Sport for me has always been more than just a game. The most successful people in sport have total self-belief. You need tunnel vision if you want to succeed in sport. There's only one route to being the best and you have to put everything else to one side. Sport is ruthless and no one else is going to do it for you. It's sink or swim.
Sport has taught me personal discipline and determination, but it can also teach you the benefits of working as one of a team. My sport allows and encourages you to excel individually, yet it is a team game and you have to balance these two aspects. It's very much like life - you can succeed as an individual, but you must never forget there are others around you.
Sport has given me a great deal - and not just financially. It has opened doors for me and opened my eyes, and I've seen things around the world that others will never see. But you also have to give up a lot for those perks.

Tuning in

Some experiences etch themselves so sharply on our memory that they form islands of clarity in our recollection. For me, such a momentous occasion took place one night in California many years ago, when I lay awake listening to the rapturous strains of a mockingbird singing from an invisible location in one of the tall trees that were dotted around the suburban neighbourhood. I don't suffer from insomnia - it was the exquisite artistry of the singer that kept me awake. As I followed his intricately woven melodies, I found myself drawn into an unexpected aesthetic environment. In order to follow the patterns that issued from the bird, I had to call on my experience of jazz and Indian classical music. The bird had me convinced that I was being treated to an ad lib performance of the most breathtaking improvisational acrobatics. I groaned and I cheered as one improbable musical variation followed another through the open window where I lay listening, until finally I fell asleep.