Holiday reading

Summer promises us two of life's great joys: escaping home and reading books - joys that are, of course, intimately connected. Books may help us to feel more at home in the world at large. We can relate our experiences to those described in great books written long ago or in distant lands because there are fewer human types than there are people. In the books of others, we find our own thoughts, embarrassments and dramas. Authors can locate words to depict a situation we thought ourselves alone in feeling, or can express our very own thoughts, but with a clarity and psychological accuracy we could not match. What was shy and confused within us is unapologetically and cogently phrased in them, a congruence all the more striking if the work was written by someone in a far-flung place or in another age. We feel grateful to these strangers for reminding us of who we are.
Through reading and travel, we escape the deadening effect of habit. Our eyes are never more open than during our first few days in a new place: except perhaps during our reading of a great book, which guides us to the interest of things we had previously ignored. Our mind is like a radar newly attuned to pick up certain objects floating through consciousness. Our attention is drawn to the shades of the sky, to the changeability of a face, to the hypocrisy of a friend, or to a submerged sadness about a situation that we had previously not even known we could feel sad about. 

Author's Note

These travel reflections were all published as articles in the Observer newspaper over a seven-year period. Here and there I have restored some small cuts by the editor, which had to be made if the piece was to fit the page, but otherwise I have added very little. The occasional outright howler has been corrected, but only if it was a matter of detail which I should have got right in the first place. Hindsight would have allowed further improvements, but there would have been no end to the process. In the second article about China, for example, it seemed likely at the time, and for some time after, that the Hong Kong dollar would hold up. A year later it fell. If I were to rewrite the piece so as to predict this fact, it would become a claim to prescience, or at any rate no longer a report written at that moment. But like any other flying visitor, in South East Asia or anywhere else, I was there at that moment, ignorant as to what would happen next, and fully occupied with making the most elementary sense of what had happened already. That has been the real story of mass jet travel: the world opening up to people who have no qualifications for exploring it except the price of a ticket. But I have never been able to believe that all my fellow travellers were quite blind. Even a postcard can be written with a purpose.

Ecotourism

If there were awards for tourism phrases that have been hijacked, diluted and misused, then 'ecotourism' would earn top prize. The term first surfaced in the early 1980s, reflecting a surge in environmental awareness and a realisation by tour operators that many travellers wanted to believe their presence abroad would not have a negative impact. It rapidly became the hottest marketing tag a holiday could carry.
These days the ecotourism label has broadened out to cover anything from a two-week tour living with remote tribes, to a one-hour motor boat trip through an Australian gorge. In fact, any tour that involves cultural interaction, natural beauty spots, wildlife or a dash of soft adventure is likely to be included in the overflowing ecotourism folder. There is no doubt the original motives behind the movement were honourable attempts to provide a way for those who cared to make informed choices, but the lack of regulations and a standard industry definition left many travellers lost in an ecotourism jungle.

Transylvanian Journey

The notebook covering the Transylvanian leg of my journey was lost for 50 years, and only restored a few years ago by a great stroke of luck. It has been a great help to me in reconstructing that period and committing it to print, but not the unfailing prop it should have been. For in Transylvania I found myself having a much easier time of it than I had planned, drifting from one hospitable country house to another, often staying for weeks. When I came to a standstill during those long halts, writing stopped too; as I was keeping a journal of travel, I wrongly thought there was nothing to record. I was often slow to take it up again when I moved on and, even then, jotted notes sometimes took the place of sustained narrative.
Fearing some details might have got out of sequence when I started writing the present book, I surrounded these passages with a cloud of provisos and hedged bets. Then the thought that these pages were not a guidebook persuaded me that it didn't matter very much, so I let the story tell itself free of debilitating caveats.