Family Business

'Look here, it's no good!' said my Dad. We were in the car on the way back to London. My father, with my brother Maurice in tow, had just collected me and my trunk from the posh girls' school I attended. He had also just sat through Parent's Day, in the course of which I was presented with the Latin prize and the prize for the girl who had done best in her end-of-school exams. He had had a long conversation with my headteacher, and now here we were bound for home and holidays.
'What isn't?' I said, though I had guessed the trend of his thoughts from my father's unusual silence. He was a talkative man as a rule. 'You can't fool me. You'll do what you want now,' he said. 'What with all those certificates. I was told you will get a scholarship to Oxford.'
'So?' I said, brazening it out. 'Mightn't that be useful?'
'I am also given to understand,' he went on, and then I knew the confrontation was coming, 'that you have ambitions to be a barrister. A barrister of all things!' My father knew quite a lot about barristers and the law.
'I just said that,' I said. 'I couldn't think of anything else to say!'
'And apparently,' he went on, 'you have the right sort of personality - you can pick the bones out of a mass of material pretty quickly, you have the gift of the gab and you enjoy performing.'
'I don't know about that,' I said. 'All I know is what I see in television dramas.'
'Be that as it may,' he went on, pulling himself together, 'I feel your heart's never going to be in the business now. Obviously, you'll go to Oxford University, and after that I can't see you fancying it.'
The trouble was that, like most children of hereditary trades, I did feel confined by the family expectations. I could see there were various professions open to me, and I wanted to explore the possibilities. At the same time, like a coward, I didn't want to upset my father. I wasn't as frightened of him as Maurice was - I was the favourite - but I found him formidable.
'It's too soon to know,' I said feebly.
'I tell you you're not going to want to join us,' said my father, who had an annoying way of usually being right in such prophecies, 'and it's a pity because you've got the gifts - the brains, the nerves, the vision.'
'There's still Maurice,' I said, sullen. My father snorted. We both knew Maurice hated the business. 'Anyway,' I went on, 'you could always use me as a sort of consultant.'
It was not as if my mother was around to lend a hand - she had died early in my childhood and my father had brought me and Maurice up. Maurice was two years younger than I was, and because he was motherless, early in our lives I got into the habit of taking care of him. It was not a hardship. I loved Maurice. Because the business was so successful we lived in a good deal of luxury - in a big house in London, posh schools for both of us, nice clothes, parties, theatres, operas. My father knew all kinds of people - politicians, actors, businessmen - and our house buzzed with good talk and interesting encounters.
'I tell you what,' my father continued our conversation. 'You can go on helping us out in holidays until you leave Oxford, and then if you decide to leave us you can. It will give you a bit of pocket money, and be a real help to me.'
'OK,' I said, relieved to be spared immediate choices and decisions, and especially the bout of depression and sulks my father would sink into if I opposed him. This was the way he controlled us. So it happened. In my last term at school, and then on vacations from university, I lent a hand, never more than about twice a year, and always on the safer assignments. I became one of the smarter undergraduates, with a little house of my own, a small but powerful white car, designer clothes, and a black dress with a Paris label that I intended to wear when I took my final exams.
It was in my last term that my father came up to see me and drove me out to a village for a meal and a chat. There were only a few weeks to go. My tutor predicted I would get a First Class degree (in Law), and I knew that if I kept my head and spent these last precious days carefully arranging information in my mind, he might well be right. I felt poised, confident, concentrated.
This was not to be. My father told me that, in about a week, he needed me to do one last assignment for him, that it was the most important piece of business the family firm had ever attempted, and that he would see that it was more than worth my while. 
'But Dad,' I protested, 'I've got my final exams coming up, and I just need to concentrate on that. It's really important that I do well and I don't want to have to think about anything else just now.'
I could tell that such pressures were simply beyond my father's imagination (or was it that he was somehow jealous of my life away from him?) and that he would interpret a refusal from me as a heartless betrayal in his hour of need.
That was not all. As he described the procedures I saw more clearly than ever before the single-mindedness of my father -- the clarity and resourcefulness with which he set about his life's work, the dynamic energy, the perfect self-control of the man. In his way he was a sort of genius, and I bowed to that in him. It made my own plans and hopes seem less important.
'All right,' I said. 'I'll do it.'