The two sisters kept Lily's driving a secret from Chen for some time. She would drive around the allotments and the railway line and gasworks, shooting the tiny hump-backed bridge with all four wheels in the air and a tremendous bump (Lily's only misjudgement), before completing the journey by the gasworks in an odour of sulphur and brimstone. Chen, however, was actually amused by what his wife had been doing behind his back. 'So you can really drive it then, Lily? Well done!'
Men were strange creatures, Mui thought. Brother-in-law should have been upset about this. Yet he was soon enthusiastically making plans with Lily for a jaunt and obviously revelling in her mastery of this new skill.
They fixed on a Monday at the beginning of next month. This was the slackest day of the week, they decided to leave early in the morning and return by midday. That way they need lose no customers. In the meantime Lily would practise around the allotments.
Resolved to go along with the majority despite her personal misgivings, Mui had been to buy a road-map. She had been able to get a ten percent discount, which impressed Chen, though Lily felt a bit insulted by Mui's lack of faith in her navigating abilities.
Within an hour of stepping over the newspapers and out of the front door, they were looking at the English Channel. Lily had driven impeccably. Even Mui, sitting in the back ready to give directions, one hand on the cross-braces of Man Kee's rompers as he pressed his nose against the window, had to grant this. On the road Lily had actually overtaken a couple of laggard vehicles with immense verve and such timing that Mui had pressed her lips closely together against her own protest. Chen went as far as applauding.
Now, after coming through the gasworks of this seaside town (reassuring, familiar sight), past the lagoon and its miniature motor boats, they were moving smoothly along the empty promenade. Lily parked in a small street off the sea front which was full of empty bays.
She was unclear about the meanings of the various roadmarkings and preferred to pay a fee rather than risk being towed away. Or even being served with a summons. Might this evidence of basic prudence set Mui's mind at rest? On the way down Lily had several times observed her elder sister's taut face in the driving mirror, which she used with great frequency. Perhaps it would be best not to put worries in Mui's mind which would not have occurred to her in the first place. Lily personally locked all the van doors and meticulously tested each in turn.
'Don't worry,' Chen joked. 'No one will want that heap of tin.' The girls bristled. Lily accused her husband of ingratitude. Mui rebuked him for being proud and too readily deceived by appearances.
Taken aback, Chen took Man Kee ahead of the two sisters to look at the grey barbarian sea. He perched Son on the top railing and put his arms around his stomach. Man Kee was a soft, warm, and what was more, these days an increasingly responsive bundle. He reacted by putting his hand, a tiny replica of the shape of Chen's, with its broad palm and stubby fingers, on his father's sleeve.
And it was in that moment that Chen resolved to bring Son up his way. He would have an education in figures (Chen's own weak point) and grow up to own many restaurants, gaining experience in all aspects of the trade on the way. The sombre sea put Chen in a pleasing melancholy as he planned Man Kee's career.
There was a trail of smoke just before the horizon met the sea in a thin line and then, suddenly shimmering in the glitter of the rising morning sun on the metal waves, a hull; and in a small cute of the railings was a grey telescope. The sparkle of the water instantly altered Chen's mood.
He put a coin in the slot and trained the glass on the ship. He was unable to find it at first, although he had aimed off carefully with the gun-sight on top of the barrel. Chen swung the tube in wide circles. There it was! Gone again. Chen swivelled the instrument more carefully. Now he had it in the centre of the circle, surprisingly large, red, and very rusty with a small bow wave: tramp steamer.
Chen lifted Man Kee to the eyepiece. 'Do you see the ship, Son?' he asked softly. 'It is a special little ship for people like us, Son. It is very little and very old but that is only what strangers see. We know better, don't we, Son, because it is the ship that will take us all back home when we are finished here. It will take you to your homeland, Son, which you have never seen.'
Chen kissed the top of Man Kee's head. Behind him now were Lily and Mui. Lily put her arm round Husband's shoulders. 'The little old ship,' said Chen. 'Let your mother see, Son.'
Man Kee would not be parted from the telescope and when he had been persuaded to relinquish his grip the whirring inside the mounting had stopped and all Lily could see was a quivering opaque circle of white light with a scratched surface. By the time Chen had found a second coin the ship was over the horizon and Lily was left with a view of seagulls scavenging gash in the wake.