Othello

The transfer to London from Stratford of an exceptional production of Shakespeare's play Othello allows me to make amends for an unfair review that I wrote when the show opened last spring. Back then I complained that Ray Fearon was too young to play the title role and I was guilty of running down his acting. I still think its a distortion of the tragedy to remove the age difference between Othello and Desdemona but I eat my words about the rest of Mr Fearon's magnificent performance. Indeed the whole cast is magnificent. Memorable scenes include the one where Cassio's competitive games with the other young officers get dangerously out of hand, and the moment when Iago begins to lose control and has to struggle to get a grip on himself. And I challenge anyone not to be moved to tears during the scene where Emilia prepares Desdemona for bed. The pace and tension throughout are terrific. Do not miss this production.

Lake Vostok

In the heart of Antarctica, nothing stirs. On the fringes of the continent there are penguins, seals and birds aplenty. But up on the great white plateau in the interior, life has no foothold. Except, that is, in a vast hidden expanse of freshwater named Lake Vostok which lies beneath nearly 4 kilometres of ice, directly below the coldest spot on earth. The water has been isolated from air and sunlight for up to 25 million years. Biologists can hardly wait to probe its mysterious depths and discover what strange organisms lurk within. Geologists and glaciologists are hot on their heels. For two years now, researchers round the world have been plotting ways to uncover the lakes secrets, and, if they get their wish, in the next few years we will witness the decade of Lake Vostok.

Scientists

There was an interesting thing on the radio last week. It seems that a bunch of scientists are getting themselves hot under the collar over what drives them to be scientists; the expression 'because it's there' springs to mind. Sure we all know its the age-old quest for knowledge, the desire to understand everything from the atom to the black hole. But what these guys want to know is why we want to know all of this in the first place and why can't science explain why we want to know?
Surely, it's more important to know whether what we scientists are doing is right, rather than get bogged down in debates over the point of it all. I would have thought that the crucial issue here is not why we pursue it, but to recognise that science is a tool, and we are the ones who should decide how, where, when and why to use it.