The Netball Captain

In our series on women in sport, Suzie Ellis went to meet England's netball captain.

Kendra Slawinski is captain of England's netball team. When I met her, she'd had a typical day for the weeks leading up to next month's World Championships: a day's teaching at a local school followed by a training session in the local supermarket car park.
I was surprised to hear about her training venue.
'Don't you get strange looks?' I asked her. 'I'm too involved in what I'm doing concentrating on my movements and my feet - to see anything else,' she said.'I might notice cars slow down out of the corner of my eye, but that's all.'
'My whole life now is all about making sure I'm at my absolute best for the Championships,' says Kendra. I'm on a strict timetable to gain maximum fitness for them. These are her fourth World Championships and they are guaranteed to be the biggest ever, with 27 nations taking part.
'We'll have home support behind us, which is so special,' she says. 'And it's important that the reputation of netball in this country should be improved. As a result of playing here, there will be more pressure than we're used to. A home crowd will have expectations and give more support. People will expect us to start the tournament with a good game.'
Their first game is against Barbados and it comes immediately after the opening ceremony. As far as I'm aware, we have always beaten them, but they'll be exciting to play. They have lots of ability.'
The England team are currently ranked fourth in the world. But, as Kendra points out, the World Championships will be tough. 'You have to push yourself to play each day, there's no rest between games as in a series. And you can still win an international series if you lose the first game. But the Championships are different because there's only one chance and you have to be ready to make the most of it.
In the fifteen years since she has been playing at top level, the sport has become harder, faster. On court, players are more aggressive. 'You don't do all that training not to come out a winner,' says Kendra.But once the final whistle blows, you become a different person. We're all friendlier after the game.' 
Netball is also taking a far more scientific approach to fitness testing.
'It is essential that we all think and train like world-class players,' says Kendra.
As captain, I think it's important that I have a strong mental attitude and lead by example. I see my role as supporting and encouraging the rest of the team.'
'From the very beginning, my netball career has always been carefully planned,' she says. So I took the decision some time ago that this competition would be the end of it as far as playing is concerned.
Doubtless she will coach young players in the future, but at the moment her eyes are firmly set on her last big event. As she leads out her team in the opening candlelight ceremony, she is more than likely to have a tear in her eye. Her loyal supporters will be behind her every step of the way.