Five-star luxury meets up-to-date technology
The five-star Merrion Hotel, which has just opened, is the result of considerable research into customer requirements and nearly two years' work converting four large eighteenth-century houses in Dublin. Creating a new hotel in this way has allowed the latest technology to be installed. This has been done for the benefit of staff and guests alike.
At the Merrion, General Manager Peter MacCann expects his staff to know the guests by name. However, for details of his guests' preferences, he relies on the hotel's computer system. It can deal with return clients in the extra-special way that is appropriate to a five-star hotel.
Though the system cost PS250,000 to install, it will pay itself over time, according to MacCann. He praises its efficiency and talks enthusiastically of the facilities it offers.
For example, a guest who requests certain music CDs during a first stay will find those same CDs ready for him on a return visit. This is thanks to the guest-history facility which allows staff to key in any number of preferences.
Hotel guests the world over frequently complain about room temperature. Another hi-tech system controls this essential area of comfort. Guests have the opportunity to change the temperature themselves within three degrees either side of the normal l8degC but, in addition, each individual room can be adjusted by any amount between 14degC and 25degC at the front desk.
For guests, though, it is the other technology offered in their rooms which is most likely to find favour. This is particularly true for the business user, and MacCann estimates that up to sixty-five per cent of his business will come from this part of the market. To provide the best service for such needs, the hotel has taken the traditional business centre and put it into individual bedrooms. Each one has three phones, two phone lines, a fax machine that doubles as a photocopier and printer, and a video-conferencing facility.
Technology changes so quickly these days that the hotel has had to try to forecast possible improvements. Extra cables have been laid to handle whatever scientific advances may occur. The televisions are rented rather than bought, so that they can be replaced with more up-to- date models at any time. DVD recorders can also be upgraded when necessary.
Despite the presence of all this very up-to-the-minute equipment in the rooms, MacCann says they have tried hard not to make guests feel threatened by technology. The one hundred and forty-five bedrooms, large and well-furnished, are both comfortable and welcoming. There are, of course, a swimming pool and gym, six conference rooms, two bars and two restaurants, and a beautiful garden at the heart of it all.
As at all luxury hotels, the food that is offered to guests must be excellent. Chef Patrick Guilbaud's Dublin restaurant already had two Michelin stars when he agreed to move his restaurant business to the Merrion. Being part of the hotel site has huge benefits, both for him and the hotel itself. He has been able to design a new kitchen and take it into the modern age. There are better parking facilities than at the previous address, too. From the hotel's side, they are able to offer a popular and successful place to eat, with no financial risks attached. Aided by technology and a highly capable staff, the Merrion looks likely to succeed.

