Fun at the Dentist's?

If you walk into W. Lloyd Jerome's dental surgery in the centre of Glasgow, you'll see bright modern paintings on the wall and a fashionable blue couch which patients sit on while he checks their teeth. Jerome says, 'Fifty per cent of the population only go to the dentist when they're in pain rather than attending for regular check- ups. That's because they're frightened.'
To counteract this, he has tried to create an environment where people are not afraid. 
That's why I took the decision not to wear a white coat. I find that's one of the things that people associate with pain. In fact, my philosophy is that dental treatment should take place in an atmosphere of relaxation, interest and above all enjoyment.'
Which is all highly shocking for anyone (most of us in fact) who has learnt to associate dental treatment with pain, or at the very least, with formal, clinical visits. Jerome says, 'If people are relaxed, entertained and correctly treated, they will forget such previous negative experiences.'.
Virtual-reality headsets are one of his new relaxation techniques. 'We were the first practice in Britain to introduce them and they're proving very popular. The headsets are used for the initial check-up, where the patient sits comfortably on the blue couch and watches a film about underwater wildlife while I look at their teeth. Then the headset switches to a special camera, to give the patient a visual tour around their mouth.' Surprisingly, most patients seem to enjoy this part of their visit to the dentists.
Another key point is that the surgery smells more like a perfume shop than a dentist's. Today there is the smell of orange. Jerome explains, 'When people walk in, I want them to realise with all their senses that it's not like going to the dentist's. Smell is very important. That dental smell of surgical spirit can get the heart racing in minutes if you're frightened of dentists.' I certainly found the delicate smell in the surgery very pleasant.
Although he is known as Glasgow's most fashionable dentist,Jerome is keen to point out that he takes his work very seriously. The relaxation techniques are important but the quality of the treatment is of course the most important thing.
For example, Jerome uses a special instrument which sprays warm water on the teeth to clean them, rather than scraping them. It feels a bit strange at first, but as long as people are relaxed, it's not painful at all.
Five years ago, Jerome went to the United States to do research into dental techniques. 'One of the things I found out there was that when you make it easier for the patient you make it easier for yourself', he explains. He sees his patient-centred attitude as the start of a gradual movement towards less formality in the conservative British dentistry profession.
At that moment, a patient arrives. Jerome rushes over, offers him a cup of tea (herbal or regular), asks him what video he'd like to watch and leads him gently towards the chair. The patient seems to be enjoying this five-star treatment and no wonder. The surgery seems more like an elegant beauty parlour than a mainstream dental practice.