Keeping the holiday-makers happy

A chalet girl's work is never done, Sarah Sutherland-Pilch tells Veronica Lee - in between making beds and delicious dinners.
This is the second year as a chalet girl for Sarah Sutherland-Pilch, a 24-year-old from West Sussex. Known by her nickname, Pilch, Sarah works for a company in Val d'lsere, France, cooking and cleaning for visitors who come to ski and stay in the wooden houses, known as chalets, that are characteristic of the area. Sarah graduated in French and History of Art from Oxford Brookes University last summer. Being a chalet girl isn't a career, she says, but an enjoyable way to spend a year or two before settling down. 'It's a good way to make contacts. I meet successful people every week.'
Sarah does not 'live in'. She gets up at 7 a.m: to walk the mile or so to the chalet, which sleeps up to 18guests each week. She has her own breakfast before preparing that of the guests. 'They get the works - porridge, eggs, cereals, fruit and croissants.' When the last of the guests has had breakfast, by about 9.30 a.m., Sarah clears up and either makes the afternoon tea, which is left for the guests to help themselves to, or cleans the rooms - 'the worst part of the job,' she says.
By about 11 a.m. she is ready to go on the slopes herself. She skis as much as possible. 'On a good day we can be up there until 4.30 p.m.' Sarah returns to the chalet in time to prepare dinner and takes a shower before doing so, but does not sleep. 'It's fatal if you do,' she says. Dinner, a three-course affair, is served at 8 p.m. and coffee is usually on the table by 10 p.m. Sarah clears away the dinner things and fills the dishwasher. 'There's nothing worse than coming in to a messy kitchen the next morning.' Sometimes she will stay and chat with the guests, other times they are content to be left alone. 'Good guests can make a week brilliant - breakfast this morning was great fun - but some weeks, for whatever reason, don't go quite so well.'
Sarah meets her friends in the chalet where she lives - and they go out at about 11 p.m. 'We usually start off in Bananas, might go to G Jay's and perhaps Dick's T-Bar at the end of the evening,' she says. But Sarah never stays out too late on Saturday night as Sunday is her busiest time of the week. 'A frightful day,' she says, 'when you certainly don't want to be cooking breakfast feeling exhausted.' 
Work begins earlier than usual on Sunday, since breakfast for guests who are has to be on the table by 7 a.m. As soon as the guests are gone, Sarah starts cleaning madly. 'We just blitz the place - clear the breakfast, strip the beds, get everything ready.' If she hasn't already done the week's shop on Saturday, Sarah does it now.
At around 3 p.m., the cleaning work done, Sarah then prepares tea for the new guests. 'They get here at around 4.30 p.m. Sometimes they are disorientated and full of questions. I'm sure it's the mountain air that does something to them.'
Between tea and dinner, Sarah takes any guests needing boots or skis down to the ski shop and then gets a lift back to the chalet from one of the ski shop staff. It is soon time for dinner duty again and perhaps a chat with friends, but not always. 'Sometimes I'm so tired I just have an early night,' she says.