A lot of advice is available for college leavers heading for their first job. In this article we consider the move to a second job. We are not concerned with those looking for a second temporary position while hunting for a permanent job. Nor are we concerned with those leaving an unsatisfactory job within the first few weeks. Instead, we will be dealing with those of you taking a real step on the career ladder, choosing a job to fit in with your ambitions now that you have learnt your way around, acquired some skills and have some idea of where you want to go. 
What sort of job should you look for? Much depends on your long-term aim. You need to ask yourself whether you want to specialise in a particular field, work your way up to higher levels of responsibility or out of your current employment into a broader field. 
Whatever you decide, you should choose your second job very carefully. You should be aiming to stay in it for two to three years. 
This job will be studied very carefully when you send your letter of application for your next job. It should show evidence of serious [line 26: beginning] career planning. Most important, it should [line 26: end] extend you, develop you and give you increasing responsibility. Incidentally, if the travel bug is biting, now is the time to pack up and go. You can do temporary work for a while when you return, pick up where you left off and get the second job then. Future potential employers will be relieved to see [line 34: beginning] that you have got it out of your system, and [line 34: end] are not likely to go off again. 
Juliette Davidson spent her first year after leaving St. Aldate's College working for three solicitors. It was the perfect first job in that 'OK ... they were very supportive people. I was gently introduced to the work, learnt my way round an office and improved my word processing skills. However, there was no scope for advancement. One day I gave in my notice, bought an air ticket and travelled for a year.' 
Juliette now works as a Personal Assistant to Brenda Cleverdon, the Chief Executive of Business in the Community. 'In two and a half years I have become more able and my job has really grown,' she says. 'Right from the beginning my boss was very keen to develop me. My job title is the same as it was when I started but the duties have changed. From mainly typing and telephone work, I have progressed to doing most of the correspondence and budgets. I also have to deal with a variety of queries, coming from chairmen of large companies to people wanting to know how to start their own business. Brenda involves me in all her work but also gives me specific projects to do and events to organise.' 
