Where I get my energy

Emma Marsden asked six women who live life to the full to tell us how they do it. 

A. Jeanette Kupfermann

Journalist and author: 'I think it's excitement. I've got to be doing something that's a challenge. If I'm absorbing something new and learning, I get tremendous energy. Anything to do with rhythm gives me energy, too - at the moment I'm learning flamenco dancing. Dance is wonderful, very expressive and energising. I think you can feel drained if you're bored, maybe feeling life is pointless. Being effective in the world - even in a small way - gives you energy.' 

B. Linda Kelsey

Magazine editor: 'I have so much work to do but I enjoy it all - I love being at work, it isn't a chore. If you enjoy something, it doesn't make you feel low even though you may be feeling tired. I need a fair bit of sleep so when I do get it I feel really good. When I'm 
running at six hours' sleep a night, I feel a bit wet. I know exercise gives me energy, but it's finding the energy to do it! I do a yoga class once a week before work and I try to do a workout tape at home. But if I've done exercise, my spirits rise amazingly. I get very low patches in the office between 3 and 5 in the afternoon and think it's probably good to eat something then.' 

C. Annie Nightingale

Disc jockey: 'I don't eat healthily to get my energy - I think it's natural enthusiasm and being positive. I really can't stand people with negative attitudes. I'm quite naive - I think we should all enjoy our lives, grab the moment. Enjoyment comes first. You've got to achieve things and set yourself various goals. I enjoy what I do and the last two years have been very exciting. In my line of business there are lots of lively young people and you can't help being affected by that. I love tearing around the place on jobs, having a mad life. I'm very sociable. I enjoy taking photographs but I'm not sure if I'm good at it. I rush to get them processed and can't wait to get them back. 
I've also started writing words for imaginary songs - it's just for fun and it's a good release for my mind when I'm doing a lot of travelling.' 

D. Floella Benjamin

Author and children's TV presenter: 'My energy comes from things I do and enjoy. I believe in what I'm doing, both at work and at home with my family and I think that being positive about life helps. That's why I love working with kids, they give out so much and have an inbuilt resilience. Energy is like a natural chemical, triggered off by communicating with others - just try smiling at people and feel the thrill you get when they smile back. It's far better than feeling sorry for yourself. Although I try to eat healthily and don't smoke or drink, I don't have an exercise plan. The most energetic I get is running around with the kids and playing with them.' 

E. Deborah Moggach

Author and playwright: 'What I love doing more than anything in the world is making a garden out of complete wasteland. I did that once. The garden was solid concrete - I smashed up all the concrete and dug in loads of soil. It was far better than any amount of workouts or tennis. The other thing that gives me energy is knowing that somebody wants to read what I'm writing - I find it difficult to write in a void. And I like sneaking into a farmer's land or a wood. If I'm found, I say "Oh, what a wonderful wood, I didn't know it was private property," and so on. I like it because it's childlike.' 

F. Katherine Monblot

Therapist: 'I believe you must have an interest in and respect for what you do in life. I like to take risks and I get bored quickly, which keeps me motivated. Doing things you don't want to do wears you out. I used to be a member of various committees and resented the demands they made on my time. You only have a certain amount of energy, so direct it into the things that are most important to you.' 

