WELCOME TO THE MODEL VILLAGE 

When you first enter the Model Village it is hard to imagine that a few short years ago this was a piece of waste ground, flat and completely overgrown with brambles. For years it had been considered a worthless piece of land. The careful planning and hard work of one man, supported unfailingly by his wife, turned this piece of ground into the masterpiece you see today. 
Many thousands of tons of soil and clay were moved during the construction of the village to change a flat site into the sculptured landscape you see today. Although bulldozers and digging machines helped to transform the land, it also involved an enormous amount of hard labour. Once shaped, approximately 1,000 tonnes of top soil were brought in and laid over it to create the lawns, flower-beds and rockeries. 
In the creation of the Model Village, hundreds of trees and shrubs were planted. These had to be carefully selected for the area. Only those plants which were able to tolerate the salt-laden atmosphere so close to the sea could be used. They also had to stand up to the severe winter gales in this very exposed position. Most of the plants were provided by local garden centres but some came from as far away as Canada and New Zealand. 
The whole village was conceived by Colin Sims and the models, over 100, were individually made by him over a period of nine years from when the village was first opened, in 1972. The models are constructed from a variety of materials - stone, concrete, specially treated wood and plastics - to withstand all kinds of weather. Initially, Colin had to seek considerable assistance from experts who explained to him how various materials would stand up to years of changing weather. But very soon he became an expert himself.
You will soon notice that a constant scale has been strictly adhered to and that attention has been paid to even the smallest detail on the models. This has been achieved by patience and the development of unique construction techniques. The Model Village has proved to be a very popular attraction and is noted for its high standard of workmanship and maintenance. The techniques used to construct such true-to-life models have since been used in other model villages around England and have even been included in some courses at colleges where modelling can be studied. 
All model buildings you will see in the village portray traditional British architectural forms and are not based strictly on one particular place or structure. One of the most impressive buildings is the Manor House. This is a typical 13th century stone structure with a brick tower and stone walls. It is based on the style of manor houses commonly found in the West Country. As you walk round the village you will also notice the Castle, St Mary's Church, a zoo and mini golf course, the latter being the most recent addition to the village.
We ask you to keep to the paths during your visit and not to touch any of the models; a slip on your part can result in hours of repair work for us. Photography is allowed from the pathways only. Dogs are welcome on a short lead. To further your enjoyment of the Model Village, you will see buttons mounted in front of some of the working models. Press these and you will make the models operate. 
At the end of your visit we would welcome any comments you might have. New models are being planned all the time and any new ideas will help us design a more varied and interesting display. We would also like to know which models, if any, you thought were not up to the standard of the rest of the village. We are continually replacing and updating the models and we need to know which ones require some attention. We hope you enjoy your visit and we look forward to seeing you another day. Don't forget to tell your friends about it. 