HAPPY HUNTING GROUND 

We're 'animal people' who enjoy the company of all kinds of creatures. Consider this typical chain of events, leading to total confusion, which began one afternoon. My daughter telephoned me at work with the news that she had found a wonderful pine snake. 
'Can we keep him?' she cried. I said 'Yes, but only overnight.' We had set up a special tank for just such passers-through, overnight being long enough to admire and look them up in our well-used natural history book. 
I was late getting home. I hurriedly put a pot on to boil just as screams of 'Oh, Mother! Help! Do something!' came from my sons' bedroom. I leapt to it. 
The crisis involved Domino the cat and Bianca the white mouse given to me as a Mother's Day present. (I've [line 23: beginning] heard that some mothers get [line 23: end] perfume.) Domino, with mouse feet waving from his jaws, ran round and round the bedroom that was crowded with furniture and children. 
Looking for a way out so he could enjoy his catch, Domino had so far avoided the forest of waving arms. I threw myself into the confusion and promptly tripped over something or someone to find myself on the floor. 
As I thought about dropping my full weight on Domino when he next came past, my eyes locked on the snake. It had escaped - or, more correctly, was escaping. It was pouring itself up and out and off the table and all over the floor. I crouched like a rabbit at the approach of its bullish head, and long powerful body. 
The snake and I were now both being jumped over by cat/mouse/kids in a screaming, leaping, hissing mass - the snake striking at every moment, the dog barking wildly. 
The pot boiled over in the kitchen and I raced to shut off the gas, returning to the battle with new strength. This time I successfully captured Domino by the tail, and pulled the small, damp and miraculously uninjured mouse from his growling jaws. Incidentally, the same mouse was caught by the same cat three more times during its lifetime, but eventually died of old age. 
[line 60: beginning] Encouraged by my success with the [line 60: end] cat, I looked the snake over for weak points. It didn't have any. In the end, I sat on the floor like a snake-charmer, rocking backwards and forwards, but without a flute. Gradually the snake relaxed enough to drop its head on to its piled-up body, but its eyes still shone with suspicion. I eventually ever-so-slowly eased my hands beneath the piled-up snake and gradually raised myself to a kneeling position, then I stood up and walked to the very end of the garden where I gave the snake the choice of living happily ever after on the garden shed by pointing it in the direction of a handy tree. 
But when I finally gathered enough courage to release the snake's head - fully expecting it to swing instantly around to crush my face in its powerful jaws - it slid away from the tree and up over my shoulders where, like a colourful leathery shawl, it gave every sign of making itself comfortable for the winter. 
We stood in the gathering dusk, four young children, Mum and the snake. DJ, my eldest, broke the heavy silence with a scientific explanation: 'You know what it is, Mum? You're nice and fat and warm, and the shed isn't.' I had the children gather at the snake's tail end and gently encourage it to move on. Slowly and unwillingly it did so. Without a backward glance, the snake travelled smoothly up the wall to disappear over the now night-shadowed roof. 
As the last tiny bit of tail disappeared from our property, three-year old Clay sighed and said it for all of us: 'Boy, that was one big snake!' 
