Behind the dolphin's smile

People love dolphins. We rush to look at them in seaside marinas, films and TV programmes. Yet according to the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society their plight is desperate. Mark Simmonds reports on the decline of the species. 

Dolphins hold a special place in our affections. They are among the most intelligent animals we know, they are sensitive to human emotions, and they allow us to dream of wonderful freedom out in the wild seas. 
This love affair has been encouraged by TV. First there was Flipper, and now there's Darwin, the star of Seaquest. However, these happy portrayals hide the reality of life for dolphins in the polluted and overfished seas of the 
late twentieth century.
The population of North Sea harbour porpoises (one kind of dolphin) is estimated to have been reduced by up to 89,000. You may expect such popular animals to be protected by law and taken care of in special marine reserves. This is not the case, however, and the lack of plans to look after them may become one of the biggest wildlife disasters of our times. 
Forty different kinds of dolphins are recognised worldwide. In the waters of northern Europe, the greatest number of dolphins are the striped, the common, the bottlenose dolphins, and the smaller harbour porpoise. The first two generally live far out in the open sea. They are normally seen only in small groups, flashing quickly past ships, and we know very little about them. 
The large grey bottlenoses and harbour porpoises, on the other hand, were once a common sight near to European coasts. Bottlenoses are particularly social and used to be found on the Channel coast and in river mouths in Britain, including the Thames. Resident populations can nowadays be found only in the Moray Firth in Scotland and Cardigan Bay in Wales, and the skin injuries found on the few that still remain indicate that they are suffering from stress. 
The complicated habits of the dolphins make it difficult to decide on the exact reasons for this reduction in numbers. The overfishing which is dramatically reducing the world's fish stocks and which is threatening to destroy local fishing industries, also threatens porpoises and dolphins. This is because porpoises have to find their food within a limited time. If fish in one area are removed by fishing, they may not survive long enough to find food elsewhere. 
They are also in danger of getting caught in fishermen's nets which are thought to be invisible to them. In many modern fishing methods, huge nets are left to float or are pulled at great speed through the sea. In recent years, hundreds of dead dolphins have been washed up on the beaches of France and Cornwall. Marks, ropes and cuts on their bodies show that the main cause of death was the fact that they had been caught by such nets. 
Waste and other substances found in the sea can be stored in the bodies of dolphins. One example is what happens with pesticides: these poisons are soluble in fat, which means that the dolphins can digest them and they can build up in their bodies. The females then produce milk that is rich in pesticides, thus passing the poison in a concentrated fashion on to their young. There is already one recorded case of a young dolphin being poisoned and killed by its mother's milk. 
But perhaps the most controversial threat to dolphins is the one posed by human disturbance. Dolphins live in groups and receive information about much of their world through sound. In the sea, noise pollution - from ships, oil wells and so on - is transmitted four times more efficiently than in the air. This may disturb the dolphins in ways that we do not yet 
understand. 