Careers Advice 

You're not happy in your job at the moment, but you don't know how to change? Kitty Doherty gives some good advice. 

 
The answer for more and more people who want to change their job is to turn to a careers adviser. You will be asked to write a brief history of yourself and then sit through a number of tests known as 'psychometrics'. A summary of the findings is then given and various careers are suggested, as well as the possible retraining needed. 
I decided to try out Career Analysts, one of the largest organisations giving career advice. Taking the careers test was like being back in my science exams. I was with a group of about ten people and we were answering questions against the clock. I had to remember that it wasn't about passing or failing. It was hard to see how the psychometrics would give an accurate picture of me. They involved things like picking out mistakes in lists of names and numbers and matching up similar shapes in a set. 
I then had a long chat with an adviser and from this, plus the results of the test, he produced a report giving his observations and recommendations. I agreed with most of the adviser's conclusions, though I was a little dismayed to find out that I had done quite badly in the scientific, technical and practical tests. I am sure that a lot of sick people are glad that I never became a nurse. It was reassuring, though, to be told that I had made the correct decisions as far as journalism was concerned. 
Rethinking your career needn't involve a massive change of direction. Last March, after working as a marketing manager with a large insurance company for five years, Donna Laney, 25, lost her job. Her friends suggested she go to Career Analysts for help. 'Losing my job was the perfect opportunity for me to take a step back and look at my career to date. I wanted to re-examine the skills and interests I have,' says Donna. Some of the results were surprising. 'I hadn't realised that I had such a gift for design. But in the end I had to balance the cost of retraining in design against my financial commitments,' she says. Other suggestions were put forward, such as taking a year off and working in the Far East. 
'I decided to use the skills I already had and move into something more suited to me than insurance. I am now working as a Public Relations officer. I am sure I would have got to this point without Career Analysts but they helped me realise, objectively and independently, what I definitely wanted to do. I have sent half a dozen friends there, who are all happy with the service.' 
There are those who feel that they definitely would not have got to that point without help. A visit to Career Counselling Services led 26-year-old Juliet Greene to make some life-changing decisions. 'After working for a major bank for six years, I decided my job was dull and I needed a new challenge. I had no idea what I wanted to do so I went to Career Counselling Services with a completely open mind. I took the tests, which showed I was interested in sciences,' she says. 'I had four sessions with an adviser. The third session was taped, which I found very useful, as you forget many of the things you say. After the fourth meeting, having listened carefully to what the results of the tests were telling me, I made the decision that I wanted to do geology and I plan to start a degree course in it later this year. I think that the advice given by Career Counselling Services was well worth the fee. I'm a lot happier now and far more positive.' 
However, careers advice doesn't work for everyone. Amanda Margetts, a 24-year-old sales representative, says: 'I had reached a stage in my career where I didn't know where to go. I thought a careers adviser might suggest something I had never thought of. Although I was given a host of new ideas, I rejected them as they either required a substantial drop in salary or considerable retraining. I wasn't told anything about myself that I didn't know/ she says. 'You have to provide the adviser with an enormous amount of personal information and I just felt that if I had told a friend the same thing, they would have given me similar advice.' 