Why would a schoolgirl want to swim 1500m, cycle 40km and then run 1Okm? Because 'it's fun'. 

Teenager with a taste for endurance 

WANTED: Sports-mad training partner for triathlete, preferably female. Chance to work with potential Olympic champion. Should be extremely keen on distance running (regular 15km sessions), distance swimming (addiction to winter training in cold rivers useful) and distance cycling (love of 1OOkm an advantage). Ability to do all three without a rest essential. 

The triathlon promises to be one of the most popular Olympic sports. Recently it has drawn huge crowds fascinated (and horrified) by athletes swimming 1500m, cycling 40km, then running 1Okm without stopping. Great for those watching, maybe, but what makes the triathletes want to punish their bodies so much? And what makes an attractive 17-year-old, with excellent academic results, give up everything for the doubtful pleasures it offers? 
Melanie Sears has not yet learnt those often-repeated phrases about personal satisfaction, mental challenge and higher targets that most athletes automatically use when asked similar questions. 'You swim for 1500m, then run out of the water and jump on your bike, still wet. Of course, then you freeze. When the 40km cycle ride is over, you have to run 1Okm, which is a long way when you're feeling exhausted. But it's great fun, and all worth it in the end,' she says. 
Melanie entered her first triathlon at 14. 'I won the junior section - but then I was the only junior taking part. It seemed so easy that I was waving at my team-mates as I went round.' Full of confidence, she entered the National Championships, and although she had the second fastest swim and the fastest run, she came nowhere. 'I was following this man and suddenly we came to the sea. We realised then that we had gone wrong. I ended up cycling 20 kilometres too far. I cried all the way through the running.' 
But she did not give up and is determined that she never will. 'Sometimes I wish I could stop, because then the pain would be over, but I am afraid that if I let myself stop just once, I would be [line 35: beginning] tempted to do it again.' Such doggedness draws [line 35: end] admiration from Steve Trew, the sport's director of coaching. 'I've just been testing her fitness,' he says, 'and she worked so hard on the running machine that it finally threw her off and into a wall. She had given it everything, but whereas most people step off when they realise they can't go any further, she just kept on.' 
Melanie was top junior in this year's European Triathlon Championships, finishing 13th. 'I was almost as good as the top three in swimming and running, but much slower at cycling. That's why I'm working very hard at it.' She is trying to talk her long-suffering parents, who will carry the PS1,300 cost of her trip to New Zealand for this year's World Championships, into buying a PS2,000 bike ('It's a special deal, with PS1,000 off) so she can try national 25 km and 100 km races later this year. 
But there is another price to pay. Her punishing training sessions have made her a bit of a recluse. 'I don't have a social life,' she says. 'I'm not a party animal anyway. After two hours' hard swimming on Friday nights, I just want to go to sleep. But I phone and write to the other girls in the team.' What does she talk about? Boys? Clothes? 'No, what sort of times they are achieving.' 
Where will all this single-mindedness end? Melanie has tried other events. She has had a go at the triathlon 'sprint', for example, where you only have to swim 750m, cycle 20km and run 5km. She wants to enter even tougher events than the triathlon. 'The big trouble is, I have no one of my age to train with,' she says. Funny, that. 