Visit to Malaysia

Paul Forster goes to a kite-flying festival, and spends a nervous night in the forest. 

Adnan Ali smiled broadly as I presented him with his torn kite. 'You have to keep it,' he said, 'it's traditional - if the line breaks, finders are keepers ... and anyway, I've plenty more.' He indicated a pile of intricately decorated kites at his feet. All were precisely 120cm wide and long, and made of tissue paper and split bamboo. 
We sat down next to them in the shade of the whispering coniferous trees that are behind the Beach of the Seven Lagoons in the state of Kelantan, and looked out over Malaysia's biggest and most serious kite festival.
In the centre of the beach stood 10 platforms, where helpers held up the kites, and a row of tense competitors holding the lines of their kites waited for the countdown. On the blast of the whistle, the crowd roared and the kites rose into the air like rockets. 
More than 500 men and boys had registered for the competition, which runs for five days every year. Each had entered four different designs which were to be judged on decoration, stability in the air and flying efficiency. 
'Flying kites isn't so difficult,' said Adnan, 'but making them takes real skill. Visit me at home and I'll show you how it's done.' The invitation was one of five I'd received that day, and I decided to accept. 
Back in his house I drank cold milky tea and ate fish crackers in a large polished room. As dusk fell, he told me to come again the next day to start rebuilding his kite but my plans didn't allow it. 
Instead I explored the southern half of the state, pointing my car inland on the road to Kuala Lumpur, into granite mountains dripping with luxuriant rainforest. I took a wrong turning and the smooth road ended suddenly at a river. 
A needle-shaped boat was waiting to ferry pedestrians across. Near it, a small sign caught my eye. It pointed up a footpath into the forest and read: 'Jelawang Jungle 3 km.' 
Before setting off, it would have been useful to know that nearly all of this distance was uphill, steep and slippery. When I got to the track, however, I found a chap waiting with a flask of tea. 
This was Baba, who looked after a tented kitchen and a dozen or so bamboo huts. I decided to stay there, determined not to think twice about insects crawling under my thin foam mattress. 
Night was totally black, full of different sounds. A waterfall roared nearby and thousands of living things moved and squeaked. In the morning there was a tremendous view over five ranges of green mountains. In the afternoon it rained. 
First wind, then lightning lashed the treetops. Seconds later I was wet through. Sliding downhill, I wondered how the scores of giant butterflies avoided the enormous drops. 
Other thoughts included the possibility of my car being swept away (it sometimes happens) and the likelihood of drowning if I opened my mouth. Fortunately the car was still there, covered in mud, at the bottom of the track. 
No one is a stranger for long here. Back in Kota Bahru, Kelantan's capital, everyone fired questions at me: 'Where are you from?' 'How old are you?' 
But in the asking there was nothing but friendliness. Kelantan might be best known for its kites but I remember it more for its human kindness. 