What sort of shopper are you? 

Love it or hate it, we all go shopping. But there are different types of shopper. Do you know which kind you are? Abby Edwards asked around ... 

A. Melanie, 22, dancer

I'm an addict - I can't spend enough money! When I have the cash I'm out there and then I don't get miserable. I definitely have difficulty walking past sale signs. My boyfriend's exactly the same, so we often drag each other around the shops. We're an addicted couple! 

B. Brenda, 40, office manager

I'm a reluctant shopper. My husband does most of the food shopping because he does the cooking and knows what he likes. I don't spend much time shopping for clothes ... I do take my 6-year-old son and 14-year-old daughter out to get clothes, but I don't enjoy that either, as we all have different tastes. I don't spend money on myself regularly, so when I do splash out I tend to feel guilty and rarely tell my husband how much I've spent - I always knock the price down a bit! The real price always sounds so shocking. 

C. Juliet, 28, personnel manager

I only shop for essentials I hate shopping and only go when I really have to. When I do, I know what I want and I won't settle for anything else. I find shopping tiring and there's always something I'd rather be doing. 

D. Anita, 35, TV producer

I like a good look round every now and then but I tend to know what I want, and where to find it. I don't waste time and I get in and out as quickly as I can. I do have hidden mistakes at the back of my wardrobe though so maybe I'm a careful shopper who sometimes gets particular purchases wrong! 

E. Lizzie, 41, secretary

I don't enjoy shopping in the least. I really dislike shopping for clothes as I can never find what I want, or anyone to help me look for it. The shops are too noisy, everything is disordered and I find it an absolute nightmare. Fortunately, I rarely have to shop for clothes as most of my clothes are given to me. As for food shopping, I go to the local supermarket once a week and get it over and done with quickly! 

F. Lisa, 22, actress

I'm probably a happy shopper. Sometimes I'll go out for a look around the shops with my girlfriends - and we'll often end up spending. I don't usually go out with a certain item in mind, but if something catches my eye I'll buy it. 

G. Suki, 26, art gallery assistant

I'm a careful shopper - I like going, but I don't really buy very much. I usually know what I want and I seldom go crazy. I do sometimes shop to cheer myself up - but I usually end up feeling much worse because I've spent too much! 

H. Ann-Marie, 29, nursery worker 

I love shopping - but only on certain days and never on a Saturday, as it's far too busy. I'd say I'm a careful shopper ... I always set off with a fair idea of what I want, and I never snap things up immediately. I have to look in other shops, in case I can find a better bargain - I take ages! 

I. Linda, 32, restaurant manager

I'm an unwilling shopper - maybe because I work in the city centre, the shops have lost their attraction for me. When I have to, I'll drag myself out - but I don't bother to try things on, it's far too much trouble. Clothes I buy don't always fit, but I don't mind too much and I'd rather make a few mistakes than have to go into shops and make a lot of effort! 