Father and son start Gold Rush 

Terence and Chris Madden have travelled from Canada's frozen north to the heat of Africa in their search for nature's most desired metals. The father and son team - one an explorer, the other a mineral expert - believe their mine on the side of a Welsh mountain could contain up to 10,000 ounces of gold. 
After ten years of digging in the Welsh hills, they are convinced that they are just metres away from a five million dollar vein of gold. 'As we dig, we are finding high levels of gold; now we just need to get a few more metres to where it is concentrated,' said Terence, 68, from Liverpool. 
The pair have dedicated their lives to the hunt for gold. Their search began after the father read of pockets of gold worth millions of pounds buried in the 'Dolgellau gold belt', an area around the Welsh town of the same name. While reading 19th century mining journals and newspapers at the Welsh National Library in Aberystwyth, father and son chose the most promising area of land to study. 
Since they first cleared away the undergrowth and found bits of gold in the rocks, they have spent the past ten years getting permission for their work from the owners, taking samples of the earth and removing old cars and rubbish. They then set about digging out 150 tonnes of greenstone rock to form a tunnel and a 10-metre shaft. 
Now they are running short of money. Having spent their savings chasing their dream, they will have to convince a backer to put PS50,000into the project to lower the mine just a few more metres to where the gold lies. Chris Madden says, 'At the moment, this looks doubtful although we've got quite a few people we can contact.' 
As word spread through the valleys last week about the dig, the magic attraction of gold started turning the heads of the inhabitants as well as the gold diggers. Dolgellau relies on tourists, and residents are cautiously hopeful. 'It would encourage more people to come here if they are right,' said Peter Woolven, manager of the Royal Ship Hotel, 'but if these two find gold I hope millions of people are not going to come and hack away at the hillside.' 
The Welsh gold industry has gone into steep decline since its height in the late 1880s, when thousands were employed in hundreds of mines dotted around the countryside. One of the last remaining mines at Clogau-St David's, which produced wedding rings for the Queen and the Princess of Wales, closed a month ago. 
Now, however, individual gold-diggers are returning. George Hall, another prospector, plans to drive a tunnel deep into the hill on the other side of the ridge from the Maddens. 'Searching for gold is very emotional,' said Hall, 70. 'It's adventurous and exciting, the wonder of uncovering hidden treasure. Maybe I'll be lucky this time.' 