SPECIALIST MUSIC SCHOOLS 

How to cope with a child who shows outstanding musical ability? It's not always clear how best to develop and encourage their gift. Many parents may even fail to recognise and respond to their child's need until frustration explodes into difficult or uncooperative behaviour. And while most schools are equipped to deal with children who are especially able in academic subjects, the musically gifted require special understanding which may not always be available in an ordinary school - especially one where music is regarded as a secondary activity. Such children - as well as those whose ability is actively encouraged by parents or teachers - may well benefit from the education offered by a specialist music school. 
The five music schools in Britain are a relatively recent introduction. They aim to provide a
sympathetic environment in which gifted children aged between seven and eighteen can develop their skills to the full under the guidance of professional musicians.
Children at specialist music schools spend between one third and one half of an average day on musical activities, for example, individual lessons (up to three hours a week on first and second instruments), orchestras, chamber groups, voice training, conducting and theory. They also spend several hours a day practising in properly equipped private rooms, sometimes with a teacher. The rest of their time is taken up with a restricted academic programme, which tends to concentrate on the essential subjects - English, maths, basic sciences and languages - although provision can be made for students who wish to study a wider range of subjects. All five British specialist schools are independent, classes are small by normal school standards, with a high teacher/pupil ratio. Most children attending specialist schools tend to be boarders, leaving home to live, eat and sleep full-time at school. This means they spend their formative years in the company of others with similar aims and interests. 
What are the disadvantages? An obvious problem is the cost; the fees are high (PS12,000-PS17,000 a year for boarders). However, each school will make every effort with scholarships and other forms of financial assistance, to help parents of outstandingly gifted children to find the necessary fees. Secondly, not all parents want to send their children to boarding school, specially at a very early age. Almost all the directors of the specialist schools express doubts about the wisdom of admitting children as young as seven into such an intense and disciplined environment. They stress, however, that their main aim is to turn out 'rounded and well-balanced individuals'. 
There is little doubt that setting musically gifted children apart from an early age can cause stress. Early signs of musical ability may disappear in teenage years, while natural competitiveness and the pressure to succeed can lead to a crushing sense of failure. But all specialist schools do keep a close watch on the progress of individual pupils, and offer help and advice if needed.
In addition, while most former pupils at music school feel that they benefited enormously from the range of high-quality music teaching available, many express reservations about the wisdom of restricting the academic programme, which definitely takes second place to musical activities. Many musically gifted young people are also highly intelligent, well able to deal with academic pressure, and feel frustrated if their intellectual needs are not met. For these reasons, it may be better to wait until the child is old enough to be able to make his or her own decisions before considering a specialist education. 
Those who are equally gifted academically may do very well within a less specialised environment; for instance, at a school with a first class music department, or else by combining a normal school routine with musical training at one of the junior departments at the music colleges. These colleges offer Saturday morning opportunities for individual lessons with fine teachers, plus orchestral and chamber music experience. But this option is clearly not practicable for families living out of reach of London or other major centres. 