GETTING FIT 

Exercise is essential for mind, body and spirit. It's one of the best ways to maintain a perfect balance when all around you everything seems more and more unbalanced and the world becomes ever more fast and furious. 
Don't groan because this is yet another article about fitness. The reason why there are so many is that it is seriously good for you. There are plenty of reasons why you should exercise and very few - for most of us why you shouldn't. Exercise improves muscle tone and provides quick changes in body shape. It improves muscle power and promotes good posture - the way in which you hold your body when sitting or standing. It helps prevent those muscle imbalances which can lead to injuries. It provides quick improvement in specific problem areas such as thighs, stomach and upper arms. It improves the condition of the heart and lungs and blood circulation. 
Probably all these reasons have been thrown at you time and time again, so maybe you are bored by them and have switched off. All right then, this should make you sit up and take notice. Did you know that exercise helps to ease depression and tiredness, and that it helps to regulate sleep patterns? Also that exercise is instrumental in controlling stress? Not only this, but exercise can help to relieve certain medical conditions. 
By now you should be influenced a little by these arguments. If not, common sense alone should tell you that exercise is good for you. 
There are plenty of types of exercise you can do aerobics, calisthenics, jogging, working out with free weights, working on weight machines. There is one point you should note - training too hard and with too much weight may cause injury, so start slowly and carefully. If you're not sure, you should consult your doctor on what's good for you personally. 
No amount of exercise will improve your body shape if you don't have good posture. This practically determines how you look and feel. Not only is a stiff or sagging body unattractive, it also lacks energy and is more likely to suffer from minor health complaints. 
If your body tends to slouch, imagine that the top of your head is connected to a helium balloon, which is trying to pull you up into the sky. This will help you to lift the chest for fuller and easier breathing. At the same time, it lengthens the abdomen, making the body look much slimmer. If the chest is well balanced when you are standing, you can see your ankles. 
Stretching the muscles improves flexibility and ease of movement, and helps you to maintain correct posture and to prevent muscle tears and injuries caused by overuse. If done four or five times a week, it will guarantee a more flexible,fitter body. So stretching should play an important part in your exercise routine, which should be performed both slowly and precisely. 
The best exercise, therefore, involves a good warm-up, stretching exercises, an energetic workout and definitely a cool down period. 