Food for all

We proudly present our own hand-picked special selection of the very best cookbook titles now on offer. 

A.
Ask anyone to think of a famous TV cook and writer, and it's frequently Delia Smith's name that comes to mind. Her recipes come from all over the world each marked by her enthusiasm for exciting food, plus her straightforward appreciation of what the average cook can do in the average kitchen. The book that established her reputation is Delia Smith's Complete Cookery Course, which has now become the kitchen reference book for the modern cook. Along with simple, but expert, guidance on all aspects of basic and more advanced cookery, Delia mixes her advice with hundreds of superb recipes that are anything but boring. Recently revised, it's more than ever the book that answers the question: 'If I could only have one cookbook, which would it be?' 

B.
It took Raymond Blanc just 15 years to move from amateur, untrained chef to chef/owner of the most famous French restaurant in Britain. Now, to accompany his first TV series, Blanc Mange, comes the book of the same name. Raymond wants to teach us all to be better cooks by demonstrating how and why certain ingredients react in certain ways. Good cooking is easy, in his view, when you really understand what's going on in the pan. Over 80 amazing recipes demonstrate exactly what he means. It's a very practical reference book, which is not above explaining why certain dishes can go wrong and introducing some basic food chemistry to clarify the points made. Monsieur Blanc loves to cook to entertain and, as this book proves, he's very, very good at it. 

C.
Le Cordon Bleu, three words which make you think of all that is best in classical French cooking. Over the past 100 years, the expert chefs of this most famous cooking school have trained all levels of students to achieve perfection. Now, to celebrate the school's impressive hundredth anniversary, comes this equally impressive new book, Le Cordon Bleu Classic French Cookbook, which contains 100 of the school's most respected recipes. Although the recipes in the book are all classics, they're all still remarkably fresh. While Le Cordon Bleu has always carried the flag for traditional French cooking, it has also moved away from rich, creamy sauces and altered its approach to cut down on the killer calories. Starting with a chapter on the basics of sound kitchen procedure, the book follows it up with Appetisers and Starters, Main dishes and, finally, Desserts. Throughout, the recipes are illustrated with step-by-step illustrations plus wonderful shots of the finished dishes. Expert chefs from Cordon Bleu schools around the world have each selected a recipe for which they are 
famous, and shared their secrets with the reader. 

D.
Fast food? Oh yuk! Surely it's accepted wisdom that good food means a long period of suffering in front of the cooker? Well, Nigel Slater, food editor of The Observer, doesn't think so as his new book, The 30-Minute Cook, will prove. Fast food, as Nigel says, 'is just what the world wants when it comes home tired and hungry and demanding something good to eat at once.' He's always believed it's perfectly possible to create something tasty in the time it takes to deliver a pizza, and he has already written two very successful books to prove it. In this great new book you'll find more enticing recipes, and each hits the table just 30 minutes after the word 'go'. Nigel has written down, in his jolly and enjoyable style, more than 200 recipes from around the world. Just because he likes his food fast, it doesn't mean this bright young writer doesn't appreciate good food. If you don't believe fast food can be great food, try his recipes: they're simply delicious. 