Looking after the countryside 

THE NATIONAL TRUST 

The National Trust is an organisation whose aim is to conserve the British countryside. Gill Page visits the Lleyn Peninsula in North Wales and talks to one of the wardens employed by the Trust to look after the beautiful areas it owns. 

Common sense. That's what a National Trust Warden needs, according to Gareth Roberts. 'And you definitely need to be good at handling people, because you're continually dealing with farmers, visitors, conservationists and building firms.' 
Gareth was born and bred on the Lleyn Peninsula and worked on his parents' farm until he married. About 80 people applied for the post as National Trust Warden for the Lleyn Peninsula. In the end, Gareth's local knowledge and farming experience won him the job, despite his lack of formal training. 
'I find it particularly helpful that I still farm with my parents and that I can deal with farmers on the same level and be aware of their problems. Also, they can't take me in about anything!' he says. His farming life also means he is well able to cope with the physical demands of the job - erecting fences, planting trees, building walls. 
Since he has been with the Trust, Gareth says he has come to understand more about nature conservation. 'When I was a youngster,' he recalls, 'I used to pick and press flowers, collect butterfly larvae and old birds' nests. And I thought to myself recently, where would I find all those flowers, the birds' nests, the grasshoppers now? It's really become clear to me that farming has affected the countryside. It's not the farmers' fault - they were just doing what the government told them.' 
Gareth says that, when he started his job, farmers and conservationists were set against each other. Both sides wanted things done their way.Now they are talking and can see each other's point of view. 'We're at the crossroads and there's just a small step needed to join them together,' says Gareth. 
Conservation is one of the main aspects of Gareth's work, along with public entry to the Trust's land, tree planting and maintenance, and meeting the Trust's tenant farmers. 'My role is to make sure jobs get finished, with as little fuss and as economically as possible. What I enjoy most is seeing projects completed, although about half my time is spent on reports, signing bills and so on.' 
Gareth is certainly keen on his job and despite never being off duty, he obviously enjoys every minute of his work, especially talking to the public. Most of them, anyway. 'It's the attitude of some people I dislike,' he admits. 'They just walk into the area, demand everything, then walk out again as if it's their absolute right. Having to be nice to those people gets on my nerves!' 
But as Gareth says, it's all down to common sense really.So if you've got plenty of that, and you like the idea of an outdoor job, you might think of applying to become a warden like Gareth - but don't expect a job to be available on the Lleyn Peninsula for a good many years! 