Interview Tips

First impressions are often lasting ones. Studies show that people form impressions about us within the first few minutes of meeting. They observe how we dress, our eye contact, our body movement and how fast or slowly we talk, our volume and tone of voice as well as our our actual words.
Mary Pearce studied to be a teacher. She says, 'I worked hard to earn my degree. When I finally graduated I was very confident.' She applied for a job at a nearby primary school and got an interview with the Head Teacher.'I noticed a small hole in my jacket that morning,' she recalls. 'I would have changed, but I knew it would make me late, and I always think it's important to be on time.' Mary didn't get the job. In fact, one of her friends who also teaches at the school told her the Head Teacher's only comment was, 'If someone doesn't take the time to present her best image at an interview, what kind of teacher is she going to be?' 
As Simon Grant, hotel manager, says: 'Interviewees who look as if they care about themselves are more likely to care about their jobs. People think it's
what's inside that counts, but in an interview you should aim to come across in the best possible way.'
Yet many people ignore the importance of having a professional image. For example, Janet Goodwood worked for ten years as an administrative assistant in a large accounting firm. When the office manager retired, she applied for
the position but wasn't even given an interview. 'I thought it was a mistake so I asked the Director of Personnel what had happened,' she says. 'He told me I didn't fit the image of an office manager. He suggested I improve my wardrobe before I applied again for promotion. I was shocked. I do a very good job and the way I dress shouldn't make any difference.' 
Movement and gestures will also influence an interviewer's first impression of a candidate. Psychologist Albert Mehrabian has discovered that 7% of any message about our feelings and attitudes comes from the words we use, 38% from voice and a surprising 55% from our facial expressions. When our facial expressions and our words send different messages the listener will put more weight on the non-verbal message. So make sure your words agree with your body language. Mixed messages will only confuse the interviewer. 
It is also important not to appear too desperate for the job or too eager to please. When Sheila Rice, a marketing specialist, applied for a promotion her interview went so well she was offered the job on the spot. 'I was delighted,' she recalls. 'But I reacted to the offer with too much enthusiasm. Once the boss sensed how excited I was, he knew I wasn't going to turn him down. Consequently, he offered me a lower salary than I'd hoped for. I'm sure I could have got more had I managed to control my excitement.' 
Finally, a consideration of what we say and how we say it will contribute to the success of an interview. David Artesio, the manager of an employment agency, suggests that it's a good idea to inform yourself about the company before you go for an interview. 'The annual report, for example, will tell you about areas of company involvement. Mention an area that interests you during the interview. This will give a positive note and convince others of your interest in the company.' 
Businessconsultant Marian Woodall suggests you have a few questions ready and avoid speaking in long, confused sentences. As she puts it, 'Poor communicators talk in paragraphs. Successful communicators talk in short sentences and even in highlighted points.' 