Running a business in the countryside 

Five women talk about their experiences setting up a business in the countryside. 

A.
'My customers are friends,' says CHRISTINE HOGAN, who runs a computer-aided design business with a turnover of over PS200,000 a year and four full-time employees. 'My husband and I moved out of London to the country when our children were small, and I wanted work I could do at home. I had worked with computers before I was married, so my husband suggested I set up a computer-aided design business. It needed a huge amount of money and things were difficult in the beginning. But I have been very careful, making sure that I told the bank manager if I was likely to overspend. Being in the house is a big saving, and I can carry on working in the evening if I want. It has remained a small business. We hardly ever deliver work - people from the area tend to collect it from us.' 

B.
'I enjoy being independent,' says MAGGY SASANOW, who works from home as a designer of greetings cards. 'I trained in art at university, and wanted to work in a museum. But when I married, we went to live in the countryside, where there wasn't that sort of work. So I decided to set up my own business and I produce a range of 50 greetings cards which I sell to museums. I work in a big room upstairs. The disadvantage of working from home is that there is always something that needs doing - like mowing the lawn. My business comes completely by word of mouth - I don't advertise at all. People send work down from London as I am cheaper than other artists. Working alone, I don't get to exchange ideas with other people any more, but generally there are more advantages than disadvantages.' 

C.
'It has been hard at times,' says DELIA TURNER, whose curtain-making business has seen good times and bad. 'I started my business eight years ago. Then this type of business was expanding, and in two years my turnover went from PS24,000 to PS80,000. I used to manage six full-time curtain-makers. But I had to sack them because of the decline in the economy, which was painful because it is not easy to find other jobs in this area. I am right back almost to where I started, making the curtains at home myself, with my husband's help, and using women who work from their homes. I have to be prepared to cut my prices when it's necessary and to look at different opportunities.' 

D.
TESSA STRICKLAND runs the editorial and production side of her children's book publishing business from her farmhouse. 'I moved to the countryside three years ago for two reasons. The first was financial, because London was so expensive, and the second was because I love the country. I enjoy being able to work when I want to. Eighty per cent of my income comes from deals with Australia, the Far East and North America, so I have to take calls at odd hours. The disadvantage is that it requires discipline to shut the office door. I publish children's books from cultures around the world, working with authors and artists. All my professional experience had been in London, so I used to feel very alone at first.' 

E.
MEG RIVERS runs a cakes-by-post business and a shop with a turnover of PS250,000 a year and employs six people, some part-time. 'I started ten years ago at home. I am very interested in health, so I started making fruit cakes, using good quality flour and eggs. Then I started getting requests from friends and relatives, and soon I was sending cakes all over the country. Seven years ago I rented a small building and everything is made there - we have a baker and assistant, and a professional cake-icer. I don't cook at all now, as I run the commercial side. My greatest problem has been the financial side of the business, which has been difficult simply because we didn't have an enormous amount of money to set up with.' 