So you want to be an actor

If you tell someone that you want to make a career as an actor, you can be sure that within two minutes the word 'risky' will come up. And, of course, acting is a very risky career - let there be no mistake about that. The supply of actors is far greater than the demand for them. 
Once you choose to become an actor, many people who you thought were your closest friends will tell you you're crazy, though some may react quite differently. No two people will give you the same advice. But it is a very personal choice you are making, and only you can take responsibility for yourself and for realising your ambition. 
There are no easy ways of getting there - no written examinations to pass, and no absolute guarantee that when you have successfully completed your training you will automatically make your way in the profession. It's all a matter of luck plus talent. Yet there is a demand for new faces and new talent, and there is always the prospect of excitement, glamour and the occasional rich reward. 
I have frequently been asked to define this magical thing called talent, which everyone is looking out for. I believe it is best described as natural skill plus imagination - the latter being the most difficult quality to assess. And it has a lot to do with the person's courage and their belief in what they are doing and the way they are putting it across. 
Where does the desire to act come from? It is often very difficult to put into words your own reasons for wanting to act. Certainly, in the theatre the significant thing is that moment of contact between the actor on the stage and a particular audience. And making this brief contact is central to all acting, wherever it takes place - it is what drives all actors to act. 
If you ask actors how they have done well in the profession, the response will most likely be a shrug. They will not know. They will know certain things about themselves and aspects of their own technique and the techniques of others. But they will take nothing for granted, because they know that they are only as good as their current job, and that their fame may not continue. 
Disappointment is the greatest enemy of the actor. Last month you may have been out of work, selling clothes or waitressing. Suddenly you are asked to audition for a part, but however much you want the job, the truth is that it may be denied you. So actors tend not to talk about their chances. They come up with ways of protecting themselves against the stress of competing for a part and the possibility of rejection. 
Nobody likes being rejected. And remember that the possibility is there from the very first moment you start going in for parts professionally. You are saying that you are available, willing and, hopefully, talented enough for the job. And, in many ways, it's up to you, for if you don't care enough, no-one will care for you. 