In hot water 

Rachel Mills is a scientist who spends as much time as she can at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean. 

Rachel Mills teaches and does research into marine geochemistry, which means she studies the chemical processes happening in the sea. She is a lecturer at the Oceanography Centre at Southampton University. When she isn't teaching, she lowers herself into a steel vehicle, a vessel for underwater exploration the size of a small car, and dives three kilometres down into the Atlantic Ocean to study underwater volcanoes. 
'Inside,' she says, 'space is so limited that I can reach out and touch the two pilots. They are used to these conditions, which mean we can't stand up or move and we must stay inside until someone opens the door from the outside. A dive can last for 16 hours - three hours to reach the ocean floor, ten hours gathering samples of rock and water and then three hours to get back up to the surface again.' 
'If anything happens, and you have a problem and have to get to the top quickly, you can hit a panic button. The outside drops away leaving a small circular escape vessel that gets released, and it's like letting go of a ping-pong ball in the bath - it goes rapidly to the surface. No-one's tested it yet, but I don't think it would be a very pleasant journey.'
'I didn't know how I was going to react the first time I climbed into the vehicle. It was on the deck of a ship and I got in with an instructor. He then talked me through the emergency procedures; including what to do if the pilot had a heart attack! They were testing me to see how I would react to being in such a small place.'
Now Rachel has made six dives. Last year she dived with a Russian crew. 'We went to a site which was a five-day sail west of the Canary Islands in the Atlantic. Here, on the ocean floor, is a huge area of underwater volcanoes, their chimneys all blowing out black smoke. It is where the Atlantic Ocean comes alive. 
The Russian team were dropping off some scientific equipment there to discover the effect of a multi-national programme that would make a hole 150 metres through a volcano.' 
When she isn't at sea, Rachel is in her office at the Oceanography Centre, Southampton. 'Two thirds of my salary comes from teaching, which I love, but I do it so I can get on with my research into the "black smokers". This is just another name for underwater volcanoes - water comes out of the rock and turns into what looks like black smoke. This pours out at a rate of one metre per second and at a temperature of 350 degrees.'
'The only time I've been frightened is when I first went down with the Americans. We were towing equipment on a SO-metre rope when suddenly there was an explosion. 
There was this immense bang as the shock waves hit our vehicle and I thought, "I'm going to die." We stared at each other in silence, waiting. When it didn't happen, we couldn't believe it. The relief was incredible - we were still alive!' 
'It's such an adventure diving down to the deepest part of the ocean. Every time I look out of the porthole and see those chimneys, there is such a sense of wonder. Here I am on the bottom of the sea, and no-one else on this planet has ever before seen them. I had studied the black smokers for three years for my Ph.D. When I got down there and saw them for real it was such an amazing feeling.' 