Trills and bills 

If there's one thing guaranteed to send tears running down your cheeks, it's the sight of a brilliant child collecting a medal. Julia Gregson asked three young stars, and their mothers, to describe some of the pleasures and pains of their lives. 

A. 
Annika Reeder, 15, won a gold medal for gymnastics at the Commonwealth Games. Her ambitions are to become a physiotherapist and compete at the next Olympics. 'The work is very hard at the moment. There is no time to watch television, or go out with friends or do much more than gym and school. I try to take the training day by day, and when I feel very, very tired sometimes my coach gives me a day off, but usually I just carry on - you can't take too many days off, it makes you stiff.' 

B.
Annika's mother

'From an early age Annika showed tremendous potential. I've seen some parents try to push their children and it doesn't work. To perform at the level Annika does is so demanding of time and energy you have to want to do it yourself. People tell me all the time that we, as parents, have given up so much, but what they don't see is what the sport's given us. We love it and what it's done for Annika. Before she did gym she was a very shy little girl who sucked her thumb and hid behind me, but now she's met people from all over the world and she's got the confidence of success.' 

C. 
Sarah Stokes made her first show-jumping appearance at ten. Since then 
she has won the British National Championship. 'It's a good job my mum and dad like show-jumping because they train me and have to take me everywhere in the horse box. The shows are from one day to five days long. I don't ever get tired of it - I love show-jumping events, they are exciting and fun. Even if I didn't have Mum and Dad, I would do it because I am so determined. I'm 
glad they are happy when I win, but I'm not doing it for them. My goal this year is to qualify for the British young riders (under-18) team. My really big ambition is to win a gold medal at the Olympics.' 

D. Sarah's mother

'From the moment Sarah sat on a horse, age 1, that was it, her passion. When she was 5, she used to get up before us all to exercise her pony. To qualify for major shows you have to jump all over England. To save money, we sleep in the living quarters of our horse box. Sarah is well organised. She is 100% happy on a horse, she knows what she's doing. Watching your child succeed at something they love is hard to beat.' 

E. Jane McShane, 10, is Britain's Under-14 Chess Champion. 'It's really friendly at tournaments. I know everybody and it's fun. When I'm playing, I don't concentrate. I should do really, but instead I just stare around and don't bother to think. I'm not scared of getting big-headed, I don't talk about my success at school. I don't like embarrassment.' 

F. Jane's mother

'Jane played her first game when she was 5. My father said, "Let's see if she likes it." My father had tried to teach me when I was young and I used to sit there bored, but Jane loved it from the start. By the end of that afternoon she had memorised all the moves, and by 6 was starting to beat adults. When she's won of course I'm pleased, but if she said she wanted to give it all up tomorrow, I wouldn't stand in her way. On the other hand I don't want to do the awful thing of putting somebody down because they are exceptional. If she has this gift, let her fulfil her potential.' 