Going up the wall

Once climbers went to the mountains. Now a challenging climb can be had anywhere, indoors or out. 

The crowd holds its breath. High above them on the climbing wall, hanging upside down by the tips of two fingers, is the French climber Francois Lombard. He is competing in the World Cup Climbing Championships at Birmingham's National Indoor Arena. 
The National Indoor Arena is more famous for staging the TV show Gladiators, but the television programme and the World Cup Climbing Championships share at least one feature - The Wall. And the fact that either event is possible is the result of a new and rapidly developing technology. 
Until the mid-1960s,climbers practised their skills on cliffs in areas where there was a plentiful supply of good climbing angles. During the winter they would either tolerate the cold weather, go walking instead or climb on snow and ice in Scotland. 
However, as the sport developed it was increasingly important for top climbers to keep fit. With the cliffs unusable for much of the year, they used brick-edges or stone buildings to 'work out' on. This allowed them to keep their fingers strong, and beat off the boredom of not being able to climb. It wasn't long before many sports centres started building walls specifically for the task, using bricks with special edges to cling on to.
Many of these early walls followed the example set by Don Robinson, a teacher of physical education who, during the mid-1960s,constructed a climbing wall in a corridor of his department at Leeds University. Robinson developed the idea of setting natural rock in a block of concrete, which could then be included in a wall. 
Scores of climbing walls of this kind were built in sports halls up and down the country throughout the 1970s but they had obvious design problems. Walls could only be built in a vertical plane, whereas cliffs outside have features like overhangs and angled slabs of rock. There was the added drawback that once the walls were up they couldn't be altered and climbers would eventually tire of their repetitive nature, despite thinking of every combination of holds possible. 
In 1985,a Frenchman, Francois Savigny, developed a material which he moulded into shapes like those that climbers would find on the cliffs. These could be fixed onto any existing wall and then taken off when climbers got bored with a particular combination. 
French manufacturers also began to experiment with panels on a steel framework. Concrete had proved too heavy to create overhanging walls without major building work, but steel frames could be erected anywhere as free-standing structures. A system of interchangeable fixtures gave climbers an endless supply of new holds. 