Conduct becoming 

Giving directions to an orchestra is never easy. Anne Inglis talks to five new conductors about their work. 

A. ANNE MANSON 

When Anne Manson, 30, asked if she could attend conductor Claudio Abbado's practice sessions in Vienna, she found herself standing in for an absent assistant. She was then asked to help on another opera the next season. 'I had to take the first orchestral rehearsal for Abbado. No, I wasn't nervous. I always had a good attitude to standing up in front of an orchestra.' American-born Manson works with a well established London-based opera company which concentrates on modern works. She is also building a reputation in other European countries, which she has visited with financial aid from the British Arts Council, and, since that first occasion, she has assisted Abbado on several more projects. 

B. ANDREW CONSTANTINE 

The most difficult part of being a conductor is deciding how to convince people to present you with the right opportunities; saysAndrew Constantine, 31, who won a major competition in 1991, after failed attempts in two other contests. Looking back, he is grateful for the timing: 'If it had happened any earlier, I am sure I would have disappeared without trace: The competition provided many performance opportunities and a period as assistant to a well-known conductor, but Constantine is finding it difficult to lose the 'competition' label: 'If in three years' time my name is still associated with the competition then I will be worried,' he says.'But orchestras such as the English Chamber Orchestra who took me on after the competition are now inviting me back. If this doesn't happen,your career will gradually fall to pieces.' 

C. WASFI KANI 

Wasfi Kani, who set up Pimlico Opera, loves the long practice period which is part of any opera production. 'The music is worth four weeks' attention; says Kani, who started conducting seriously in her late twenties. After university, she supported herself by working in London's commercial centre until Pimlico Opera turned fully professional two years ago. Starting lessons 
with Sian Edwards was the key moment for her. 'I saw her conduct and realised she was the same size as me - I had always been taught by much bigger people which makes a huge difference.' She likes the complicated nature of opera: 'There are lots of arguments, and you've got singers' personalities to consider ... ' 

D. ROGER VIGNOLES 

'Conducting has come upon me as something of a surprise, but it holds great fascination for me,' says Roger Vignoles, 48. In fact, it's not such a strange career move. He started out as a resident musician with an opera house, and worked with good conductors. Last year he was asked to direct Handel's Agrippina from the piano at a festival, something he had never done before. 'It was much less difficult than I thought. I found I knew the music well, I knew what I wanted it to sound like, and I tried my best to get the performance I wanted. Fortunately, people have respected my ability as a musician generally. I am benefiting from every piece of experience I've ever had, both in musical style and in the actual business of performing. Now I will do whatever people ask me to do so I can find out what I like doing.' 

E. WAYNE MARSHALL 

It was back in 1986 that the conductor Simon Rattle noticed a young assistant conductor on one of his productions and told his agent about Wayne Marshall. Marshall, now 32, soon found himself conducting a musical in London at short notice, a difficult beginning. He even had to deal with some over-relaxed professional musicians reading newspapers during the show: 'I was just tough with them. I always gave a clear beat and got the best result I could. A lot of orchestral musicians I've seen don't seem to need advice and instruction from a conductor. But I'm never afraid to say what I want. If people see you're worried, it gets worse. I've never studied conducting formally and no book tells you how to conduct but people have been kind to me. I am determined and I know what I like.' 
