The Collectors 

Amanda Roy writes about the things she collects and the reasons why so many people enjoy the same hobby.
 
I have always loved collecting and collectors and one in three adults indulges in this hobby. It is a world of passion, envy and enthusiasm and delight. However, if you enter this world, remember one thing: in the end, if you do not fall in love with an object, do not collect it. 
Since the beginning of time, people have had the urge to collect. When primitive man collected pebbles, he hung them around his neck. Attracted by their shapes and colour, these pebbles represented man's first attempts to gather objects for intellectual and spiritual reasons. Over the intervening centuries, nothing much has changed. Small boys and girls still collect stones and seashells just for the beauty of their forms and colours. 
I have been collecting all my life. Everything from flowers such as tulips to pottery and paintings. My first collection was of stones picked up in my parents' garden. Aged six I had the good fortune, although it did not seem so at the time, to be sent to a school in a remote part of England, a cold and windy place surrounded by hills. When my parents came to visit me they used to take me to the local museum, which was full of objects collected by people in the past. I was fascinated by these objects. 
Surprisingly I am not alone in being interested in collecting objects. One in three adults indulges the same passion. The reasons why people collect has become a subject of great interest. The current thinking is that, for some individuals, it is the only aspect of their lives where they have complete control. For me, it's just something I enjoy doing.
One famous collector was the Duc de Berry in France. He owned a 'room of wonders'. This was a collection of natural and artificial curiosities. There were cups made from coconut shells, carved ivory beads and pieces of Oriental china. Another aristocrat, Catherine the Great of Russia, collected more than 4,000 paintings.
However, you do not have to be rich and powerful to start a collection. I have collected items as different as tulip bulbs and china cups, searching out examples of each type with incredible determination. I remember the day that I persuaded a fellow collector of tulips to part with one which I wanted to add to my collection. I planted it and watered it until one year it vanished - stolen by another collector. 
One collection that I made was of American rag dolls - 350 of them. I looked all over the USA for these dolls, searching out each variation in design with delight. This collection was destroyed when my house caught fire. Next morning, I stood inside the front hall and saw the remains of furniture and my collection. I am not certain which saddened me more!
It is, I suppose, the way that collections change hands that has always interested me. A silver spoon that once belonged to a king, a poet: it is this that gives value to the goods that are traded in the markets of the world. As small objects become a popular collector's item, so they begin to rise in price. The toys of the 1950s are now positively an investment, provided of course, that you did not throw away the original boxes. (Not only did I put them in the bin, I also did the same to the contents.) 