It's a tough job? 

Chris Arnot asks four people with dream jobs if they're as wonderful as they seem. 

A. Raquel Graham 

Raquel Graham rings from the taxi taking her to the airport. She can't make our appointment tomorrow because her boss wants her to be in Los Angeles instead. When you're personal assistant to a pop star, you're expected to jet around the world at the drop of a hat. Raquel loves her job and gets on well with her boss. 
There's just one minor problem - she can't stand flying. 'On a nine-hour trip to California I usually take sleeping tablets to help calm me down,' she admits. Her worst experience was being on Concorde. 'It seemed so shut in with those tiny windows.' 
Offices in Manchester and London occupy her when she comes down to earth. There's some mundane paperwork to get through - organising the diary, sitting in on meetings with solicitors and accountants, sorting out itineraries and making yet more travel arrangements. 
She didn't apply for the job. A chance meeting with the manager of a pop group led to the offer of work behind the scenes and she took a secretarial certificate at evening classes at the same time. Five years later she was in the right place at the right time when her boss needed a PA. 

B. David Brown 

David Brown has been an accountant and a golf caddy; a man who carries a golfer's bags. On the whole, he preferred the golf. Well, so would you if golf was your passion. There were drawbacks however. A small flat fee is on offer, plus a percentage of the winnings. The average earnings are between PS25,000 and PS35,000 and much of that will go on travel and hotels. 
He was 31 when he first caddied for the golfer, Greg Norman. 'You're not just carrying bags. You're offering advice, pitting your knowledge against the elements and trying to read the course.' 
His accountancy skills were recently recognised by European Tour Productions when they made him statistical data administrator. From cards brought in by the caddies, he compiles and analyses the statistics of each day's play. The results are sought after by television commentators, golfing magazines, and the golfers themselves. 

C. Martin Fern 

Martin Fern is the editor of the 'Food and Drink' pages of a daily newspaper and one of his less difficult tasks is to sample what's on offer in the finest restaurants. What does he think about restaurants that charge exorbitant prices? 'For those who can afford it, it's up to them,' he says. 'I'd rather spend PS120 on a meal I'll remember for the rest of my life than buy a microwave.' 
It was his talent as a cook that led to the offer of a food column from a friend who happened to edit a Saturday Review. For Martin, at the time creative director of an advertising agency, it was a useful secondary income. He was 42 when another newspaper rang to offer a full-time job. 'It meant a 50 per cent cut in guaranteed income,' he says. 'But it was a chance to convert my passion into a profession.' 
He still does all the cooking at home and tries to keep his waistline under control by cycling a couple of miles to the nearest tube station. 

D. Dick Prince 

'I started writing children's stories about 20 years ago,' says Dick Prince, one of Britain's most popular children's writers. 'Before that, I had always loved words and enjoyed using them, but my writing had mainly been verse. Then I had this idea for a story. I had been a farmer, and knew the problem of chickens being killed by a fox. 
So I wrote a kind of role reversal story called The Fox Busters, which became my first published children's story.' 
Where do his ideas come from? 'Well, it's not easy, I have to work at them,' he says. 'That is what I usually do in the mornings. I'm not up with the dawn, I'm afraid. After lunch, I spend another couple of hours typing out the morning's scribbling - all of which I do with one finger on an old portable typewriter rather than on one of those awful laptops. 
I get between 50 and a hundred letters a week and that is the part about being a writer that I enjoy the most. I do try to answer them all, but nowadays I have some secretarial help.' 