NENE VALLEY RAILWAY

About the Railway
The twelve kilometre-long Nene Valley Railway passes through the lovely Nene Park, from an Eastern terminus at Peterborough to the Railway's headquarters at Wansford (next to the Al main road). A two-kilometre extension of the Railway takes passengers through Wansford Tunnel to the quiet beauty of Yarwell, the present Western end of the line.
Fares: adult PS10.00, child PS5.00, Family Fare (up to 2 adults and 3 children) PS25.00. Special prices may apply on public holidays.
Nene Park
With golf courses and a large Caravan Club site, why not make it a complete day out for the family by visiting Nene Park? There are thousands of hectares of public parkland with boating lakes, picnic areas and a nature reserve, as well as a miniature railway.
Wansford
Wansford Station is the home of a unique collection of historic trains from many parts of Europe. This includes such famous types as the elegant De Glen Compound locomotive from France, and the German Class 52 Kriegslok (the largest working steam engine in Britain) as well as '92 Squadron' and 'Mayflower' which were built in Britain. You can see these engines all year round whether or not the Nene Valley Railway is running.
The buffet, bar and souvenir shop, however, are only open on days when the train is running. A site entrance fee of PS2.00 for adults and PS1.00 for children is charged at Wansford.
A Famous Railway
Nene Valley Railway is a favourite with film makers, due in particular to its ability to take on the appearance of a railway in any part of Europe. Octopussy, in the series of James Bond movies, is a good example of what can be done. Corne and see where it was filmed.
Services for Schools
The Railway runs special timetable services from May to July to allow school groups to visit the railway and for teachers to set projects. The work can be done while pupils are here or in the classroom. A special educational pack is available, price PS1.50 plus postage. At other times of the year, school parties can hire the train ('Teddy Bear') with up to 3 carriages to travel along the Railway on non-service days. One month's prior booking is requested. There are special low fares for groups of 60 or more pupils. Telephone 01780 784444 for further information.
Private Hire of Trains
The Railway is a popular place for special family occasions or a company visit. It can provide the setting for a most interesting afternoon or evening out. Special programmes can be arranged to meet your wishes to include buffet, bar, entertainment, discos, etc. For further information please contact the General Manager at Wansford Station.