The Outdoor Centre

Fees are for car with four people. Each extra person is 50p. Fees to be paid at main office.
The centre is not a private club; it is an organisation whose aim is to provide outdoor sport and recreation facilities for all members of the public.
Group visitors are requested to inform the centre in advance of their intended visit.
Windsurfing - One-day course
Beginner windsurfing courses are offered on Saturdays and Sundays when the weather is good enough. Learning to windsurf is a lot of fun. The excitement when you sail across the water for the first time is not easily forgotten. Boards with small sails are available for beginners.
Coursefee: PS32.50 (this includes all equipment)
One-day adventure course
This is an opportunity you have been waiting for. Come and try sailing, climbing, surfing and archery. This course is intended to introduce outdoor activities to adults in a fun, leisurely manner. You do not need to be extremely fit or to have had previous experience of the activities. All you need is to be interested.
Coursefee: PS22.50
Play Park
The Play Park is suitable for children from two to ten years of age. It is one of the best of its type in the country. It has sand and water play, slides, large ball pool, play castle and much, much more. Next year the centre will open a new Play Palace and Play Ship.
Group day and residential courses
We also offer day and long weekend courses for groups. We receive regular visits from schools, colleges and youth groups. There are three large rooms with twelve beds in each, which can be booked in advance for groups of up to 36 people (minimum 12).
Summer adventure holidays (for 8-14 years of age)
Sailing Climbing Windsurfing Fun Games
Safety is of primary importance at the Outdoor Centre. All staff are fully trained in First Aid, and qualified to teach the activities on offer. We also make certain that all children only take part in activities that are suitable for their age and physical abilities. For this programme children must be able to swim 25 metres and be in good physical health.