STAMP COLLECTING - IT'S A HOBBY THAT CAN GROW AND GROW

Millions of people of all ages enjoy a hobby which is both interesting and fun. And every year, more and more people start a stamp collection of their own and discover an interest which can last a lifetime. Starting your collection is easy because stamps are everywhere. Holiday postcards from friends, birthday cards from favourite aunts and letters from pen friends can all provide you with stamps from all over the world. But once you've started collecting seriously, you will probably want to join the Stamp Collectors' Club which exists to provide collectors with new British stamps.
As a Club member you order the special sets of new stamps you want for your collection. You can receive these in three different ways. We can either post you a complete set of stamps on an envelope addressed to you, or send you the same stamps in a colourful information pack with lots of interesting facts. Or, if you prefer, we can send you the individual stamps for you to arrange in a special book of your own.
The Stamp Collectors' Club has about 70,000 members and you could become a member too,with a two-year membership costing just PS5. You can even get a reduction if a group of you join at the same time. We're sure you'll agree that this is great value for money.
And when you join, the Club sends you a Starter Pack at no extra cost. This contains 100 stamps to begin your collection, together with an attractive box to keep them in. You also receive our helpful 4-page guide to collecting, which has further suggestions on how to add to your collection and includes useful addresses of shops and businesses that sell stamps.
Every two months you'll get a copy of the dub magazine, which is packed full of competitions and quizzes, and gives you the chance to exchange stamps with members around the world.
Why not start on an adventure which will give you years of pleasure? You'll spend many happy hours looking at the amazing variety of stamps in your collection or searching for unusual ones which you know are out there somewhere just waiting to be found. So join the Stamp Collectors' Club today and discover the fun and excitement of stamp collecting.
To join the Club simply complete the application form and send your membership fee. Your Starter Pack will be sent within 28 days of receipt of your application.