Gallery News

Easter quiz for children
During the Easter holidays young visitors can take part in a quiz on the subject ofSurprises.The free quiz sheets can be picked up from the desk at the Orange Street entrance. Children will be directed to 14 surprising paintings and asked a variety of questions about them.
The quiz sheets will be available during normal gallery hours from 25 March until 9 April.
New picture
The Gallery now has a fine still life by the Dutch 18th century painter Jan van Os. This large picture (89.1 cm x 71 cm) of flowers and fruit is painted in light, bright colours on wood. It is one of the first pictures of this type in the Gallery. The picture is signed and dated 1777 and 1778. It is not unusual for a picture like this to be dated in two years: the artist waited for particular flowers to bloom in their different seasons in order to paint them. This picture was generously given to the Gallery by Miss Violet Churchman in memory of her sister Ida Nancy. It is now on display in Room 25.
Special exhibition
The exhibition 'Painting in Spain during the late 18th century' opened in the Sunley Room on 15 March. Recently the Gallery has bought works by three Spanish painters of this period. Paret, Melendez and Francisco Bayeu, who are the focus of the exhibition. These three artists are joined by Francisco's brother Ramon, by Antonio Gonzalez, and by two Italians who worked in Spain during these years - Corrado Giaquinto and Giovanni Battista Tiepolo. The exhibition runs until 31 May.
Lecture news
The series of lectures arranged to go with the special exhibition continues every Wednesday. On 5 April, LizzieBarker will discuss the work of Melendez, while on 12 April, Sarah Symmons will lecture on Luis Paret. On 19 and 26 April, Juliet Wilson will talk about Francisco Bayeu.
On Tuesdays in April, Erika Langmuir will explain how artists often 'tell a story' through their pictures.
Gallery restaurant improvements
The Gallery is delighted to announce that an improved and expanded service is now available in the Gallery restaurant. With its new kitchens the restaurant offers a wide choice of hot and cold dishes at reasonable prices.
Information for visitors
Free guided tours of the Gallery take place every day at 11.00 am and 3.00 pm (except Sundays). These tours introduce some of the Gallery's greatest pictures, and show the whole range of the Gallery's collection of some of the most important European paintings from the 13th to the early 20th centuries.