SUNNINGDALE HOTEL

The Sunningdale Hotel was built in 1913 and opened by Princess Louise. It has provided excellent service for people from all over the world and people of all ages and nationalities have stayed here. During the past 80years over 50,000 guests from 174different countries have visited Sunningdale.
The hotel is on one of the main roads leading to the town centre. It is about 20 minutes by bus from the centre of town and buses to many other parts of the town stop outside the hotel. Guests should be careful not to travel on buses with the blue sign Express on the front because they do not stop near our hotel. An underground station is less than 100 metres away.
The main building has 200 well-furnished, centrally-heated single rooms, each fitted with hot and cold water basins. Showers, baths and toilets are at the end of all corridors. The hotel has a shop, sitting rooms, four television rooms, table tennis room, library and laundry. There are also eight pianos available for guests' use. There are spaces to park cars in the hotel drive.
Daily newspapers are provided free and stamps can be bought at the office.Guests who stay for long periods must pay for their accommodation weekly in advance and one week's notice is required for departures. Short or long term guests are welcome but long term guests are offered rooms first.
Meal times are: breakfast 7 am - 9.30 am; lunch 1 pm - 2pm; dinner 5.30pm - 7 pm. During the week, for those studying or working late, dinner can be requested until 11pm by writing your name on the late list or by telephoning before 7 pm. A selection of 10menu choices are available for breakfast and dinner.
No animals of any description or fires of any type (either for heating food or heating the room) are allowed, and guests are requested to respect the comfort of others. If you have tapes or CDs, please try to keep the noise level down to a minimum, especially between the hours of 11pm and 8am.
Guests are advised to use taxis to get to the hotel if they arrive by train because we are some distance from the main railway station.