Membership

The Short Story Society exists to help writers in Britain today. Started in 1899, the Short Story Society is now one of Britain's most active arts organisations.
Society Magazines
We produce a range of excellent magazines, including the popular Short Story Review. This magazine includes short stories by some of Britain's top writers, as well as providing plenty of opportunities for new writers to have their work printed. Another magazine, Short Story News, has interviews with writers and is packed with information about events, competitions, festivals and the writing scene in general. To see a selection of articles from recent issues, follow the links on this website.
National Short Story Competition
We run the National Short Story Competition, the biggest competition of its kind. It is open to anyone aged 18 and over and short stories on any topic are accepted. Short stories should be between 1,000 and 1,500 words long. There is no entry fee for anyone belonging to the Society (non-members pay an entry fee of PS5). The competition runs from April until the end of October each year. The ten best entries will appear in the Society's annual book of short stories. The actual winner will receive a publishing contract to produce his or her own collection of short stories.
Education
For nearly thirty years the Society has taken writers into classrooms, providing children and teachers with new ideas and building confidence in their own writing. Current projects include the Young Writer of the Year, which was started in 1998 and is open to writers aged 11-18. All winners receive book prizes and are invited to study on a five-day course taught by professional writers.
The Writers' Cafe
The Writers' Cafe is the social centre of the Society. Relaxed and stylish, with freshly cooked vegetarian food, excellent coffees and cold drinks, it is the ideal place to look through the Society's magazines. The Cafe also provides monthly exhibitions, short courses and readings. Its location is in the heart of London, and it is open from 11.00 am to 10.00 pm Monday to Friday and 11.00 am to 8.00 pm on Saturday. Society members receive discounts on selected products and events.
Becoming a Member
We have members worldwide, and anyone aged eighteen or over is welcome to join. If you are interested in joining The Short Story Society, click here and fill out a registration form.