Antarctica Sightseeing Flights Website

Welcome to the website. Here is all you need to know before booking a flight.
During the brief Antarctic summer, Antarctica Sightseeing Flights takes tourists in a full- size passenger plane (Boeing 747) from Sydney, Australia, over the continent of Antarctica and back.
Flight dates for next year are not definite yet, but if you make a booking now, your deposit is transferable if we need to change the day.
Questions
These are answers to the most frequently asked questions about Antarctica Sightseeing Flights.
How long is the flight?
The average flight is 12 hours. About four hours into the flight, we usually see the first sea ice and icebergs. We spend four hours over Antarctica and the remaining time travelling home. On the way to and from the continent, Antarctica experts who have lived on scientific research stations there give talks on the environment and history, and answer questions. A camera next to the pilot, which is linked to the video system on board, gives you a pilot's eye view throughout, from take-off to landing.
Will I get a seat next to a window?
All passengers are given two boarding passes. At the halfway point of the flight, passengers are asked to move to the seat shown on their second boarding pass. Business and first class passengers will have a window seat for half of the flight and a next-to-window seat for the other half. Economy passengers will have a window seat or the seat next to a window seat for half of the flight and an end of row seat for the other half of the flight. While over Antarctica, we encourage passengers to get up from their seats and move about the plane, allowing everyone to share the sightseeing opportunities. The pilot flies in long 'figure 8s' over various points of interest to allow these amazing sights to be seen equally well from both sides of the plane.
What happens if the weather is bad?
We have 17 different approved flight plans. Our captain looks at the satellite cloud picture on the morning of the flight and selects the direction which promises the clearest views.
Will I see penguins and other wildlife?
As most Antarctic wildlife lives at sea level, over 3,000 metres below the plane, we can't see them in any detail. We do not land on Antarctica, primarily for environmental reasons. To experience Antarctic wildlife, you would need to join a boat tour.
Can I take photographs?
Definitely! All cameras are welcome. We even provide a few fun onboard photo opportunities where you can experience what it is like to wear Antarctic cold weather clothes.