Climbing to the top of Britain

Each year thousands of people climb Ben Nevis in Scotland, and because of its northerly location, the climate can be bitterly cold. Climber Keith Hewitt describes his first time on Ben Nevis.

It was February, my first big winter climb. Our route was up the north face of the mountain to Tower Ridge. It's six hundred metres up - probably the longest climb in Britain. We planned to camp for three days in the 'Carries', which are like big bowls cut into the walls of the mountain half-way up.
We were carrying tents, sleeping bags, and metal spikes for our boots -you'd have trouble on Ben Nevis without them because you get snow so hard it's like walking on ice. Even though some of the group were very experienced, we packed all kinds of safety equipment, including lights for attracting attention, hard hats and extra clothing. Although the weather forecast was perfect, with no strong winds, there was still a general feeling of nervousness when we set out. Ben Nevis in winter is always a challenge.
The track soon climbed and my legs felt heavy. Being the weakest member of the group, I had to rest more frequently. The others sometimes stopped for a break to let me catch up, but as soon as I reached them they set off again. I promised myself that in future I would always train properly before a climb.
After 200 metre<;,we reached the beginning of Tower Ridge, the route that would take us to the top of Ben Nevis. It's only a metre and a half wide and the mountain drops away hundreds of metres on each side. We knew we had to keep calm and concentrate on every step as we moved slowly along it.
After seven hours of climbing, we reached the top. On a clear day, you can see the sea and right across it to the island of Skye, 48 kilometres away. However, we weren't so lucky, as a mist had come down.
On Ben Nevis, getting back down to camp can be as much of a challenge as going up. You need to be able to read a map properly a wrong turn could lead to slopes too dangerous to go down in winter. I was glad we had decided to take it in turns to do that job. That first time, it was only when I was safe in the tent that I could say I really enjoyed the experience. But at least I made it to the top.