International Book Club

Have you ever thought of joining a book dub and buying new books through the post? Here at the International Book Club, we already have many members buying books from us by mail.
To join:
You just need to send us your first order from our book list.
Immediate benefits:
As a special offer, you may choose any reduced-price books from our new members' book list, to the value of PS6 in total (plus postage and packing). By doing this, you will save pound on the publishers' prices.
Tick the box on your form to order a free watch.
If you reply within seven days, we will send you another free gift carefully chosen from our book list by our staff.
Order a DVD from the many on offer in our list, at half the recommended retail price.
When you've joined:
As a member, you'll enjoy savings of between 30% and 50% off the publisher's price on every book you buy, and what's more, they'll come straight to your door. Your free club magazine arrives once a month, to keep you up to date with the latest best-sellers. This means that every year we offer over 1,000 books to choose from. On the Internet, you can find all our titles for the year on our exclusive members' website.
Being a member:
All we are asking you to do while you are a member is to choose four books during your first year. After that, you can decide on the number of books you wish to take.
In each of our monthly club magazines, our experienced staff choose a Club Choice book - a work of fiction or a reference title which they feel is particularly worth buying, and which is offered at an extra-special price. However, if you do not want this book, just say so in the space provided on the form. We will always send the book if we do not receive this.
So, return your application form today, but hurry - it's not every day we can make you an offer like this. To apply to become a member, all you need to do is simply fill in the enclosed form and return it in the postage-paid envelope supplied.
Before you know it, your books will be with you. Please don't send any money now, as we will send you your bill with the books. And remember, you have up to a fortnight to decide if you wish to keep the books you have ordered. You should then either return the books or send your payment.