A JOURNEY ALONG THE BEAUTIFUL DOURO RIVER

VOYAGES JULES VERNE operate a 'hotel ship' along the Douro river in Portugal. The MV Lady
Ivy May can take 160 guests in double cabins, all of which face outside and have a private shower and WC. On board the ship, which has air-conditioning, you will find a sun-deck, lounge, bar, dining room, shop and library facilities.

Itinerary
Day 1 Depart in the early evening from London Heathrow to Oporto. Your guide will meet you on arrival and take you to the Lady Ivy May, where you will spend the night.
Day 2 After a morning's sightseeing in Oporto, you will return to the ship and depart for Entre-os-Rios. This part of the journey up the river takes four hours.
Day 3 You will continue travelling up the river. In the early evening, the ship stops at Peso da Regua, where port wine is produced. At dinner you will be able to try the delicious food and drink from this area.
Day 4 After breakfast you will travel south by bus to the ancient town of Lamego and visit the cathedral, several churches and a museum. The museum was formerly a palace and now has an excellent collection of paintings, tapestries and sculptures. You will then return to the ship and sail on to Tua.
Day 5 At this point the Douro becomes very narrow. Depending on the depth of the river at the time, you may be able to continue by a smaller boat to the Spanish frontier at Barca d'Alva. The return journey to Tua is by coach and there is much to see along the way.
Day 6 In the morning you will drive to Sao Joao da Pesqueira for one of the most wonderful views in the whole of the Douro valley. You will return to the ship for lunch and then join the Douro river valley railway for a beautiful ride through the countryside to Regua, where the Lady Ivy May will be waiting for you.
Day 7 There will be a trip to Vila Real before returning to the ship for lunch and then setting off down the river to Oporto. You will sleep on board the Lady Ivy May.
Day 8 You will arrive in Oporto in plenty of time for independent sightseeing and last-minute shopping, before you catch the flight home to London
Heathrow.