The Ghan Train 

Mark Ottaway travelled by train from Darwin, in the north of Australia, to Adelaide, in the south. 

The Ghan train crosses the Australian continent, from the warm northern coast through seemingly endless desert to the colder Southern Ocean. It is often called the 'famous Ghan', which is perhaps unfortunate since it is known, above all, for being late. 
The dream of a rail link between Darwin and Adelaide was partly achieved in the 1920s with a line from Adelaide as far as Alice Springs, but there was often serious flooding on the line making it difficult for trains to pass. A new line was completed a few months before my journey. 
The railway was built for speeds of up to 115 kph and the Ghan is certainly not a high- speed, inter-city train - there are few stops and almost all passengers are holidaymakers. Nor does the Ghan aim to provide luxury in the same way that a train like the Orient Express does, although the on-board food is excellent. 
The railway was originally built to carry goods, not passengers. It was thought that sending goods from Europe to Australia's densely populated south via Darwin and the train, rather than around the continent by ship, would save time and money. 
It is not every day a transcontinental railway is completed, and the Ghan claims to be the world's first north-south one. As I waited to board the Ghan, I could see that everyone was really looking forward to the journey. The Australian pensioners, who made up the majority of my fellow travellers, were particularly keen to board. 
Our first stop, where the Ghan waited four hours, was at Katherine. Some passengers got off here and took a boat trip up the gorge. I didn't leave the train until Alice Springs, where I went on a two-day trip to Uluru (Ayers Rock) with a small group of passengers and a guide. Climbing the rock is not encouraged nowadays and few people do. Our group just walked around the rock and stayed to watch the beautiful sunset. 
From Alice Springs there are two trains a week heading south, so many passengers break their journey here. The view from the train after Alice Springs isn't particularly interesting. There is a lot of flat land, with nothing to look at but cattle. But at dawn on the third day we reached the foothills of an area close to the Southern Ocean. My journey was over and, although the train might not have delivered on everything the advertisements promise, it had taken me to several of the most amazing sights that Australia has to offer. 

 
