Eight-eighteen News 

Eight-eighteen News is a news agency for young people 

The members of our agency are aged 8-18. We collect news and write news reports, stories and articles. We send these to leading national and local newspapers, magazines, television, radio and websites to be published. The news stories and articles by our members that are accepted by newspapers and TV and radio stations, can all be read or listened to on the Eight-eighteen website. We have three centres around the country where young people can meet other members and get involved in projects, and we intend to open new centres nationwide.
Since our news agency started in 1994, when we were called 'Young News', over 2,500 young people have been members. Sophie was one of them. She says:
'I first heard of Eight-eighteen when they interviewed me for an article about young people's opinions on hip hop music. I sat in a room with a team of young journalists and was amazed by the opportunities they had. Age wasn't important, they were trusted to do the stories on their own. 
I started going to the Eight-eighteen centre in my city, got some training, then was a member until I was 18. Eight-eighteen has helped me achieve more than I thought possible. With all the skills I learnt, I got a job at 19, and am currently the youngest employee on a major news website, checking articles written by the journalists before putting them onto the site.' 

Get involved at every level

When you join Eight-eighteen, you'll be trained and you'll take part in monthly meetings to decide who is going to be responsible for writing each news story.
Eight-eighteen encourages skills-sharing between members. 'Peer trainers' are experienced Eight-eighteen members who are 12 years old and over. They train new members and teach them basic journalism skills. As they become more experienced as trainers, some members present sessions to audiences of young people and adults outside Eight-eighteen, often in youth clubs and summer camps. These young trainers are always supported by older staff who accompany them on these trips.
Eight-eighteen News holds training sessions for new members three times a year. Our next new-members' training will be in February. If you, or someone you know, is interested in joining, call Director Den Ley at 01622 657874 for more information. The Eight-eighteen programme is suitable for children with reading and writing skills at all levels. Membership is free and there is no test to join.

