THE ICEHOTEL 

For many years the Arctic was a popular destination in the summer season to see the land of the midnight sun but in winter the few inhabitants had the snow and ice to themselves. By the end of the 1980s it was decided that the dark and cold winter should be seen as an advantage. In the winter of 1990 the French artist Jannot Derit was invited to have the opening of an exhibition in a specially built igloo (a building made of snow) in the little town of Jukkasjarvi on the frozen Torne River. The building, named Arctic Hall, attracted many interested visitors to the area. One night a group of foreign guests decided it would be a good idea to sleep in the Arctic Hall. The following morning the brave group were very pleased with their experience and the idea of an ice hotel was born. Today it is world famous. 
As soon as winter begins, a team of snow builders, architects and artists from all over the world come to Jukkasjarvi and they make the hotel for that year. As one part is completed, it opens to visitors and overnight guests, while the other parts are still being built. The first part is completed in December and each week after that a new part opens, until January 7th when the hotel is completed. As the ICEHOTEL is built under the open sky, using the natural materials of the winter season, the finishing date depends on nature and therefore there are sometimes changes to the plan. In the spring, as the weather gets warmer, the hotel melts. 
Inside the hotel, the temperature is never colder than -5 degC to -8 degC, however cold it may be outside. Winter outer clothes such as warm overalls, hats and gloves are included in the cost of guests' stay at the hotel. In addition to this, it is a good idea for guests to bring sweaters and a scarf as well as plenty of woollen socks and to choose footwear that is larger than normal to allow space for thick socks. 
If you are planning to come to the hotel, you can buy warm sweaters, woollen socks and much more on the ICEHOTEL website. You can order these and the equipment you will need at the same time as you book your visit. The items will be delivered to your room when you check in. 
The hotel is in the village of Jukkasjarvi, 200 km above the Arctic Circle but only 15 km from Kiruna airport and 17 km from Kiruna train station. Transport by bus can be arranged from the airport or train station to the ICEHOTEL. 
 
