Anna's new school 

It's been a very exciting week, as we've just moved into our new school building! It's an amazing place, as the builders have used wood for the whole thing, just like in our old school, but it's also one of the first in my country designed to be really environmentally friendly. 
The school took months to build, so we saw it all happening. It was really exciting seeing the builders clear the space where it would be, although it also meant that some lovely open land disappeared. And the noise of the building machines was really loud, although the builders often had to stop work because it rained so hard. We all began to think the building would never be finished. 
We have five classrooms now, which are enormous - much bigger than in our previous school next door, which was very old. We share one room with people in the town when they want to have meetings and so on. There's a nursery too, a lovely dining room, and really big changing rooms which we're looking forward to using as soon as our new sports field is ready. 
When you come into the school, one of the first things you notice is that there aren't any heaters in the building! Instead, the heat for the school comes from all of us inside it - the children, the teachers and the computers we use. The building is so well designed that it holds all the heat inside - and all the sound too, so if we sing inside our classrooms, we can almost believe we're inside a concert hall! 
Another thing you'll notice is that the school roof has a tree on top of it! It was put there by the builders once they'd finished the roof, because they said it was the custom in Austria, the country where the roof was made. The electricity for lights and computers comes from a wind turbine on a hill behind the school. We went with our teacher to look at it yesterday, and it goes round really fast. It's so big, it can be seen for miles! We took some pictures which we're planning to put on the website. 
Even though we're already using the school building, there are still some parts to be added to it - for example, at the moment we're putting on a play for parents to come and see, but we still have to walk back to our old school hall to do it. The replacement will be ready by next year, though. We're so pleased with our new school, and our teachers say we'll all learn much faster now we're in it! 
 

